 
  
 
 
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA  
 
Proof Committee Hansard  
 
SENATE  
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION 
COMMITTEE  
 
Estimates  
 
 
(Public ) 
 
THURSDAY, 27 MARCH 2025  
 
CANBERRA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BY AUTHORITY OF THE SENATE  
 
 
[PROOF COPY]  
  
CONDITIONS OF DISTRIBUTION  
This is an uncorrected proof of evidence taken before the committee.  
It is made available under the condition that it is recognised as such.   
 FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  
 
Thursday, 27 March 2025  
 
Members in attendance:   Senator s Cash,  Colbeck, Hume, McGrath, Nampijinpa Price , O'Neill,  Barba ra 
Pocock, Pratt, Roberts, Sheldon, Shoebridge, Stewart,  
 
 Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 1 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS  
In Attendance  
Senator Lines, President of the Senate  
Department of Parliamentary Services  
Ms Jaala Hinchcliffe, Secretary  
Ms Nicola Hinder PSM, Acting Deputy Secretary  
Mr Steven Fox, Parliamentary Librarian  
Dr Andrew Banfield, Acting Assistant Secretary, Research  
Ms Heather Walsh, Assistant Secretary, Library Collections and Systems  
Dr Dianne Heriot, Head of Design Integrity and Collections  
Mr Jason Lucas, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Corporate Services  
Ms Nicole Short, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Operations  
Ms Kate Cook, Assistant Secretary, Corporate Operations  
Ms Denise Catt, Acting Assistant Secretary, Parliamentary Engagement  
Mr Vance Khan, First Assistant Secretary, Security Division  
Mr James O'Brien, Assistant Secretary, Security Operations  
Mr Matt Boyley, Acting Chief Information Officer  
Mr Rohan Whitmore, Acting Assistant Secretary, Chief Information Security Officer  
Ms Thao Le, First Assistant Secretary, Finance and Property Services and Chief Financial Officer  
Mr Paul Pak -Poy, Assistant Secretary, Property Services  
Ms Lauren MacInnes, Assistant Secretary, Planning and Quality  
Mr Sam Hatherly, Acting Assistant Secretary, Finance  
Ms Rachel Lloyd, Assistant Secretary Procurement and Contract Management Taskforce  
Parliamentary Service Commissioner  
Dr Gordon de Brouwer PSM, Commissioner  
Ms Jo Talbot, Acting Deputy Commissioner, Integrity, Reform and Enabling Services  
Ms Kylie Barber, Assistant Commissioner, Integrity, Performance and Employment Policy  
Ms Melanie McIntyre, Assistant Commissioner, General Counsel  
Committee met at 09:02  
CHAIR (Senator Pratt ):  I declare open this hearing of the Senate Finance and Public Administration 
Legislation Committee into the 2025 -26 budget estimates. Today we begin by acknowledging the traditional 
custodians of the land on which we meet today, the Ngunnawal and Ngambri people, and we pay respects to 
elders past and present. That respect is extended to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people here today. The 
committee has set 16 April as the date by which senators are to submit written questions on notice and 29 May as 
the date for the return of answers to questions on notice. Our proceedings today begin with the Department of 
Parliamentary Services , followed by  the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet for the rest of the day , as per 
the program.  
Under standing order 26, the committee must take all evidence in public session. This includes answers to 
questions on notice. Witnesses are reminded that in giving evidence to the committee they are protected by 
parliamentary privilege and that it is unlawful for anyone to threaten or disadvantage a witness on account of 
evidence given to a committee. Such action may be treated by the Senate as a contempt. It is also a contempt to 
give false or misleading evidence.  
The Senate has endorsed the following test of relevance for questions at estimates hearings, which is that any 
questions going to the operations or financial positions of departments and agencies which are seeking funds in 
estimates are relevant questions for the purpose of estimates hearings. Officers are reminded that the Senate has 
resolved that there are no areas in connection with the expenditure of public funds where any person has 
discretion to withhold details or explanations from the parliament or its committees, unless the parliament has 
expressly provided otherwise.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 2 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  The Senate has resolved also that an officer of the Commonwealth shall not be asked to give opinions on 
matters of policy and shall be given reasonable opportunity to refer questions asked of an officer to superior 
officers or a minister. This resolution does not preclude questions  asking for explanations of policies or factual 
questions  about when and how a policy was adopted. Witnesses are reminded of the order specifying the process 
by which a claim of public interest immunity should be raised . I incorporate that statement into Hansard . 
The extract read as follows — 
Public interest immunity claims  
That the Senate — 
(a) notes that ministers and officers have continued to refuse to provide information to Senate committees without properly 
raising claims of public interest immunity as required by past resolutions of the Senate;  
(b) reaffirms the principles of past resolutions of the Senate by this order, to provide ministers and officers with guidance  
as to the proper process for raising public interest immunity claims and to consolidate those past resolutions of the Senate;  
(c) orders that the following operate as an order of continuing effect:  
(1) If:  
(a) a Senate committee, or a senator in the course of  proceedings of a committee, requests information or a document 
from a Commonwealth department or agency; and  
(b) an officer of the department or agency to whom the request is directed believes that it may not be in the public 
interest to disclose the information or document to the committee, the officer shall state to the committee the ground on whi ch 
the officer believes that it may not be in the public interest to disclose the information or document to the committee, and 
specify the harm to the public interest that could result from the disclosure of the information or document.  
(2) If, after receiving the officer 's statement under paragraph (1), the committee or the senator requests the officer to 
refer the question of the disclosure of the information or document to a responsible minister, the officer shall refer that 
question to the minister.  
(3) If a minister, on a reference by an officer under paragraph (2), concludes that it would not be in the public interest to  
disclose the information or document to the committee, the minister shall provide to the committee a statement of the ground 
for that conclusion, specifying the harm to the public interest that could result from the disclosure of the information or 
document.  
(4) A minister, in a statement under paragraph (3), shall indicate whether the harm to the public interest that could result 
from the disclosure of the information or document to the committee could result only from the publication of the information  
or document by the committee, or could result, equally or in part, from the disclosure of the information or document to the 
committee as in camera evidence.  
(5) If, after considering a statement by a minister provided under paragraph (3), the committee concludes that the 
statement does not sufficiently justify the withholding of the information or document from the committee, the committee 
shall report the matter to the Senate.  
(6) A decision by a committee not to report a matter to the Senate under paragraph (5) does not prevent a senator from 
raising the matter in the Senate in accordance with other procedures of the Senate.  
(7) A statement that information or a document is not published, or is confidential, or consists of advice to, or internal 
deliberations of, government, in the absence of specification of the harm to the public interest that could result from the 
disclosure of the information or document, is not a statement that meets the requirements of paragraph (1) or (4).  
(8) If a minister concludes that a statement under paragraph (3) should more appropriately be made by the head of an 
agency, by reason of the independence of that agency from ministerial direction or control, the minister shall inform the 
committee of that conclusion and the reason for that conclusion, and shall refer the matter to the head of the agency, who sh all 
then be required to provide a statement in accordance with paragraph (3).  
(d) requires the Procedure Committee to review the operation of this order and report to the Senate by 20 August 2009.  
(13 May 2009 J.1941)  
(Extract, Senate Standing Orders)  
CHAIR:   I remind senators of their obligations under the Behaviour Code for Australian Parliamentarians to 
treat witnesses with dignity, courtesy, fairness and respect.  
Department of Parliamentary Services  
Parliamentary Service Commissioner  
[09:05]  
CHAIR:   Good morning  to the President of the Senate, Senator Sue L ines;  Ms Jaala Hinchcliffe , Secretary;  
and other officers of the Department of P arliamentary Services.  I also welcome  Dr Gordon de Brouwer, 
Parliamentary Service Commissioner , and other officers. Ms Hinchcliffe , do you have an opening statement?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 3 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I have a very short opening statement , noting the busy day you have  and the time.  
Good morning, Chair, Deputy Chair and members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear 
before the committee today and provide an opening statement relating to ongoing matters at the Department of 
Parliamentary Services. I will provide a copy of this statement for tabling and for reference to the committee. My 
colleagues and I welcome the opportunity to answer your questions today.  
Before taking question s, I will provide the committee with the following information. On 12 March 2025, I 
received from Dr Fiona R oughley SC her report arising from the fact -finding investigation into the action s of the 
Department of Parliamentary Services on the incentive -to-retire payment made to Ms Catherine Saunders. The 
report is an extensive examination of the department's actions and engagement, with Dr Roughley's findings and 
recommendations supported by evidence. The report contains seven recommendations that go directly to DPS's 
internal processes and decision -making when making ITR decisions and payments, including the management of 
conflicts of interest and record keeping. I can confirm that I have accepted, and the department is in the process of 
adopting, each of these recommendations.  
I will need to consider how, at an appropriate point or points in time, to make further material about Dr 
Roughley's report available to the committee. This consideration will occur against the background of a related 
investigation that is being conducted by the National Anti -Corruption Commission. Any questions about the 
NACC investigation should be referred to the NACC. I am conscious that discussing any of the matters identified 
in Dr Roughley's report may inadvertently identify persons of interest, prematurely damage reputations and/or 
compromise an individual's right to impartial adjudication.  
Finally, I commend the dedicated staff of the department , who  continue to demonstrate commitment to our 
purpose, display parliamentary values in all aspects of our work and work diligently to maintain Australian 
Parliament House as  the centre of Australian democracy and  as a national cultural icon, from our stewardship of  
Parliament House through to our widely -celebrated work  during the 2025 Enlighten Festival , which showcased 12 
inspirational Australian women who campaigned for a more inclusive democracy. The commitment of staff and 
dedication to service shows. I'm  proud to be secretary of the department and I'm proud of our staff. My colleagues 
and I are happy to take questions from the committee.  
CHAIR:   Thank you . Dr de Brouwer, do you have an opening statement?  
Dr de Brouwer :  No, I don't , thank you.  
CHAIR:   Thank you . We'll go to questions. Senator Hume.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you very much for coming to estimates . Ms Hinchcliffe , congratulations on your 
permanent appointment ; that is very good news . I trust we'll enjoy many more estimates together!  
At the last estimates we discussed a very special desk. I want to confirm with you now that you at least know 
where the desk is being stored.  
Ms Hinder :  We are absolutely confident that the desk is being stored in our offsite storage area , and, as we've 
answered to the related question on notice, we're giving consideration as to the placement of the desk now that 
DPS is almost halfway through its property move.  
Senator HUME:   Do we know why the desk is in storage?  
Ms Hinder :  The desk was in storage because it wasn't being  used in the deputy secretary's office at that time.  
Senator HUME:   So it's not broken?  
Ms Hinder :  As I said at the last estimates , the desk is useable and workable . We're giving consideration as to 
where it goes now.  
Senator HUME:   Do we pay for the department's storage facilit ies separately?  
Ms Hinder :  I believ e we've got a contracted arrangement with offsite storage. If that is incorrect, I'll come 
back to confirm.  
Senator HUME:   Could you also confirm how much it is that we pay for offsite storage ? 
Ms Hinder :  Of course.  
Senator HUME:   That would be very good . On q uestion on notice 105, you said you were unable to locate 
documentation of the approval for the work to be undertaken . I'm wonder ing whether you have any update on 
whether there is a receipt for that work that was undertaken . 
Ms Hinder :  We certainly do have receipts for components of the desk. In other words, t here were  some  brass 
fittings that were purchased because they were not available in stock. For the remainder of the costs of the desk, Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 4 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  it's been costed against staff time to be able to do the desk construction , and for our own internal purpose s there 
are no receipts  that are  provided on staff time.  
Senator HUME:   Right . So there hasn't been an allocation of what the cost would be for that particular desk , 
because it was staff time that was involved in building it ?  
Ms Hinder :  There was staff time involved in it.  
Senator HUME:   It's B AU.  
Ms Hinder :  That's right —as part of their duties . But I also note that they weren't diverted, a s I understand  it, 
from tasks in maintaining Parliament House to the desk. The desk was done in their off time.  
Senator HUME:   In their off time?  
Ms Hinder :  Not in their off time. It was done in spare time within their normal bounds of dut ies.  
Senator HUME:   Spare time within normal bounds of duties —that's an oxymoron , isn't it ?  
Ms Hinder :  Not really. If the y had  time allocated to other tasks , they were completing those other tasks . 
There was time allocated to the construction of desk , but it wasn't specific time  allocated to the construction .  
Senator HUME:   They were tasked with building the desk as part of their duties.  
Ms Hinder :  That's correct.  
Senator HUME:   I can understand that. Who was it that tasked them with building the desk?  
Ms Hinder :  In the absence of the documentation, I don't want to be absolutely confirmatory,  but I understand 
that it was verbally approved  by the then  secretary.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you. Do we know what date it was requested?  
Ms Hinder :  I can track back and provide that on notice. I don't have that date  in my head.  
Senator HUME:   Do you have an idea —a vague month?  
Ms Hinder :  No, Senator, I'm sorry ; I don't.  
Senator HUME:   Could you provide that on notice . 
Ms Hinder :  I can see if the team can provide it. We'll provide that on notice.  
Senator HUME:   That would be helpful. Thank you.  I'll turn to question on notice 108 . At the last estimates, I 
asked for some more information on  the $35,359 spent on sit -and-stand desks for parliamentarians . I believe  that, 
at the time, I might have made an error in assuming that this was money that had been  expended so far on the 
creation of multiple desks, because , in your response to my question on notice, you stated that this money had 
been spent on  'the planning and design of sit -and-stand workstations for parliamentarians and their staff, and the 
manufacture of a prototype desk '. I just want to get this right. Over $35,000 of taxpayer money was paid for one 
desk?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Yes, that's correct. It's a prototype desk , and, as I understand it, this also relates to the fact 
that it 's replacing furniture that was specifically designed for members and senators when this building was 
designed. It's gone through a design integrity process , working with  the moral rights  authority , in terms of the 
design and the build.  
Senator HUME:   Can you separate out the design element from the construction element ?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I don't have those numbers with me , but I can provide you with the numbers on notice.  
Senator HUME:   Okay . My head fell off, I have to admit , when I read that . After all we'd been through with 
the very special desk for the former deputy secretary that cost $20,000, I had underestimated  that the department 
could find  a way to spend $35,000 on one other desk. Where is this masterpiece of a desk being stored at the 
moment?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  The current prototype desk is here in the onsite storage.  
Senator HUME:   It's in onsite storage in the building?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I understand that, yes.  
Senator HUME:   When we were talking about the $ 20,000 desk at last estimate s, you said that this was 
money well spent because it was a valuable lesson for internal staff in craftsmanship. So what was it that they 
learnt? I'm interested to know . It was s uch an extraordinary amount of money.  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I'm not sure that we said that it was money well spent. I think the evidence that we gave 
was that that was the amount of money that was spent and that it was used as a training opportunity for staff, 
particularly in relation to th e craft of cabinetry making. But that's my amount of knowledge o f that. I'm happy to Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 5 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  provide you , on notice , some of the skills that went into the desk and to provide how those skills were able to 
benefit the team.  
Senator HUME:   For the prototype of the sit -stand desk for parliamentarians , if we extrapolat e out what the 
cost might be , even if only half of all parliamentarians received a $35,000 sit -stand desk , that cost would be 
nearly $4 millio n. Do you think that's value for money?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  These are issues that we are thinking through in relation to our capital works program. On 
something like this  where we are looking to build something for members and senators , I'm also conscious of  how 
we engage with members and senators about what it is that they need  and what it is that would assist you to do 
your job. So I agree with you that the numbers for the cost of this are large, and we will need to look through our 
capital works program about issues like this to think about whether that cost is something that's sustainable  and 
whether  it provide s something that members and senators want and need . 
Senator HUME:   Is it something that members and senators have requested?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  My understanding is that, yes, there have been requests in the past , but I can take that on 
notice for you.  
Senator HUME:   If they have requested sit -stand desks, do you think they expected sit -stand desks be custom -
made for them or do you think they happy to have something that is already in storage?  Let's face it,  our staff 
already have sit -stand desks. They exist. I f they say, 'I want one of those,' do you think that we need to be able 
create something brand -new at a cost of $35,000 per desk in order to meet that basic request?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  As I said, I think these are exactly the right questions that you are asking and that we are 
asking ourselves. As I indicated, part of the issue that, as I understand  it, we've been thinking through with the sit -
stand desks is the furniture they are replacing is furniture that was specifically designed for senators and members 
to ensure the dignity of the House . In relation to the particular design of the building , we have gone down that 
path again in terms of the design of these sit -stand desks. I think we probably need to have some further 
consultations with senators and members about what you need and how you'd like that to be delivered. I'm 
thinking through ways that we can do that before we get significantly down a project like we have with this one.  
Senator HUME:   When something like this is commissioned , you would anticipate that it would cost $35,000 
to design and create a sit -stand desk prototype. Is that something that you do beforehand ? Do you say, 'This is 
how much we 're going to allocate towards th is particular project ,' or do you get the bill afterwards and go, 'Hell 's 
bells, that is a bit of a waste of taxpayer money '? 
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I can't say for this project because it had started and got to this stage before I got here. But, 
again, the issue that you're raising about how we see these projects, how we commission them and the amount of 
money they're going to cost, and weighing up those factors of the necessity for the work, the cost for the work and 
making sure that we're testing the market and getting value for money is exceedingly important to me.  
Senator HUME:   Yes, okay. My concern, of course, is that there is this pervasive culture of waste and now 
there is numerous evidence that this has been an ongoing problem. I understand that we don't necessarily want 
some of the beautiful rooms in Parliament House filled with furniture that looks like it came off a hard rubbish 
collection. That's fine. But this is, I think, of great concern. The $20,000 desk that is in off -site storage —clearly 
there are other things that are in off -site storage too —if I can, can I, on notice, have a full inventory of this 
collection and the estimated cost of construction for each piece of furniture that is in off -site storage , if you have 
the paperwork, and its current market value. P erhaps the taxpayer can recoup some of the waste of that 
department 's decisions by maybe selling some of the stuff that is off -site that we  are clearly never going to use.  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I'll take that on notice, Senator.  
CHAIR:   Senator, you might need to rotate the call shortly. Senator Shoebridge and Senator Roberts are 
waiting.  
Senator HUME:   That's fine. We can come back.  
CHAIR:   Senator Shoebridge.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   I'm looking forward to going to the former government furniture warehouse later 
this year. You may remember last estimates round that I asked you some questions about legal proceedings that 
were taken against the Commonwealth and D r Wade who works in the library.  Do you remember those 
questions?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Yes. 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   As part of those questions , I asked  whether  anyone ha d any institutional memory of 
the proceedings , referencing people in the room.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 6 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Yes. 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   You said:  
I suspect that there's no -one here that was here at the time.  
Do you remember saying that?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Yes. 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   That wasn't true, was it? 
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Yes. That was my understanding at the time. Given the evidence that was given by the 
parliamentary librarian , that in relation to the issues that you were  that you were discussing in 2023 were — 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   No, no, 2021. This is about the legal proceedings against D r Wade that we now 
know cost the Commonwealth $110,000 on a deed that was executed in October 2021. That 's what I was asking 
you about. You 've provided a tiny bit of clarification about the dates. What you said was not right, was it?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Well,  Senator, at the time we were talking , I thought we were talking about 2023 —that Mr 
Fox had discussed that he wasn't involved in discussions  that were held with — 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Ms Hinchcliffe, I was asking you —and the record shows very clearly —about 2021. 
And, indeed, when I was asking you that and you ga ve the answer that there was nobody who had any 
institutional memory , Ms Dianne Heriot was actually sitting behind you, like she is now. What was her role in 
October 2021?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  In 2021, I understand that Dr Heriot was the parliamentary librarian. If you'd like , Dr 
Heriot could come so that you can ask her questions about what her knowledge was in 2021.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Well, let's get there, but my first concern is this. I ask you questions about anyone 
having institutional knowledge of what was happening in 2021. The then former librarian was sitting behind you 
and, as I understand, was deeply involved in those matters in October 2021. You gave an answer which was 
incorrect, which is a polite characterisation of it — 
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Senator — 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   and nobody, Dr Heriot, nobody from the department comes through and clarifies it. 
The current librarian, who is sitting at the table , who must have known his predecessor was in the room —nobody 
volunteers the information , and you take it on notice. Is that how it works?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Senator, I gave you the evidence that I believed to be true at the time based on the question 
that I understood you were asking. I'm happy to go back to the Hansard  and review it and see whether I need to 
make a correction, and I'm happy to ask Dr Heriot to come to the table now and answer any questions you might 
have.  
The President:   Senator Shoebridge, I might add that the secretary also added that it was her understanding 
that the previous secretary had dealt with this matter.  So that's the evidence she also gave.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Mr Fox, you knew that the former librarian was in the audience —sorry, not in the 
audience, in the room. You must have known that she had a role in the proceedings. Did you?  
Mr Fox :  I was aware that Dr Heriot was in the room, yes.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Did you know that she had a role in the proceedings  that I was asking about?  
Mr Fox :  I have no knowledge. The  evidence  that I gave was that the matter was managed by the then 
secretary at the time.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Let's see if Dr Heriot can shed any light on matters . Dr Heriot , did you have any 
institutional memory of the proceedings involving Mr Wade , which ended in a deed of settlement executed in 
October 2021 , under which the Commonwealth was forced to pay $110,000 : $50,000 in damage  and $60,000 in 
costs?  
Dr Heriot :  I am aware that there was a matter and that the matter was settled, but the matter itself was 
managed by the secretary.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   What knowledge did you have about the deed?  
Dr Heriot :  I don't know about the deed.  I wasn't involved in its negotiation.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Did you have any knowledge of the nature of the proceedings ? Were you copied 
into emails?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 7 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Dr Heriot :  I knew from  media of the nature of the proceedings, but not —only what was reported, effectively. 
I received some e mails and I was required to answer some questions, but I  didn't manage the proceedings , and I 
don't have an in -depth knowledge —sorry, I don't have  an institutional knowledge of the proceedings, which was 
your question.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   So y ou were  required to answer questions. What questions were you required to 
answer?  
Dr Heriot :  I believe I answered questions about the nature of the work that the Research Branch did. 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Alright. And you were  copied into emails. What emails were you copied into?  
Dr Heriot :  I can't remember what emails I was copied into in 2021 ; I'm sorry . There weren't  many of them . 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   What was the nature of the emails that you were copied into? I ask you this because 
I would have thought it would stick in the mind of a manager of an organisation if one of their employees had 
been caught  in defamation proceedings for activities they did during work hours in their workplace which  cost the 
Commonwealth $110,000. Did that not stick in your mind, Dr Heriot ? 
Dr Heriot :  I was aware of the proceedings, but I wasn't aware of the management of the proceedings, I wasn't 
aware of the relationships , about how they were being managed, and I wasn't aware of the settlement.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   You weren't  aware of a  settlement ? 
Dr Heriot :  Sorry, I knew there was a settlement, but I wasn't involved in it and I'm not aware of its terms.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   You said you were required to answer some questions. Were  those questions asked 
by a lawyer?  
Dr Heriot :  I'm sorry ; I can't remember.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Were you involved in any aspects of the litigation either as a witness or in 
providing material to lawyers?  
Dr Heriot :  I was not involved as a witness . I don't believe the matter proceeded to trial.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Did you provide information to lawyers?  
Dr Heriot :  I provided information through the department that would have gone to them about the function of 
the library.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Well, Dr Heriot, you would have known if any management actions were taken  
against Dr Wade , who was in your direct line of management, wasn't he?  
Dr Heriot :  I managed the library . He had two line managers beneath me.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   You would have been aware if any management actions were taken against 
somebody in your department who had cost the Commonwealth $110,000 in damages and costs. You would have 
been aware of any management action taken, surely, as the head librarian?  
Dr Heriot :  I'm not aware of any action taken regarding that case.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Well, Dr Heriot, I'm going to ask you, because you say you can't remember sitting 
there, to take on notice what  emails you were copied into  and the nature of those emails. I'd ask you to provide 
those emails to the committee. I'd also ask you to provide the details to the committee of what material you  
provided for the investigation  or response. Will you provide  that on notice?  
Dr Heriot :  I'll take that question on notice.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   Ms Hinchcliffe, I, not unreasonably, given the Australian public has had to pay 
$110,000 because of the actions of Dr Wade, have asked what, if any, management actions have been taken , and 
in two  answers the department has said it does not comment on matters that relate to current or historical code  of 
conduct investigations and legal proceedings. That's  the answer you provide d on notice for both.  
Dr Heriot :  Yes. 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   The public has a right to know if there are  any consequences for people costing the 
public $110,000 for aggressive , defamatory tweets they make on the company dime when they 're working. I'm 
going to press for answers to both of those questions . What, if any , action has been taken in relation to a member 
of your department who has cost the Commonwealth and the Australian public $110,000 because of the actions 
they took during work hours?  
Ms Hinder :  I will take that question initially, if that's possible, please. It is correct . It's a matter of 
longstanding practice that the department —in fact, any department —doesn't provide details in relation to current 
or historical codes of conduct.  However, in this case it's also very difficult to be able to provide you with absolute Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 8 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  confirmation because, as the secretary, the Parliamentary Librarian and others have referenced, including  in our 
answers , the matter was handled directly by the then secretary of the department. So, for that reason , we are going 
to continue to say that the matters relating to employment and what we do in relation to our office rs and that 
employment are code of conduct matters that we don't comment on. But this  is also an historic al matter that 
predates the secretary and m e. 
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   You're telling me, Ms Hinder, that , in relation to management actions taken in a 
case as serious as this, there are no written documents  and no personnel file that detail what action  and steps were 
taken against Dr Wade? Is that really your evidence? Is that the state of record keeping in your department?  
Ms Hinder :  Senator, what I am saying is that this  matter  is a historical or  current code of conduct matter , and 
we don't comment on code of conduct matters. I' d be very happy to go back and have another look through the 
records to see what records might be available , but, in relation to providing you with confirmation  as to what 
action was taken against that  officer , we don't comment on historical or current c ode of conduct matters.  
Senator SHOEBRIDGE:   I am going to press for an answer , and if you wish to continue to not provide an 
answer you're obliged to make a public interest immunity claim. You have decided not to make a public interest 
immunity claim in your nonanswers to date . I'm going to  press for an answer both to the questions I asked on 
notice and to those  questions I put to you  now. Will you provide  that on notice?  
Ms Hinder :  I'll take that on notice very happily.  
CHAIR:   Back to the coalition and then Senator Roberts.  
Senator HUME:   I have a couple of questions around question on notice 115. There was a table you provided 
that outlined the ASL for the department . Can you confirm that in that table the number of senior executive band 
2 staff in the department has doubled since 2022 -23. 
Ms Hinder :  I'll take that question and be able to give you a little bit of construct. At the moment we have an 
SES officer on long -term leave , and s o, in effect, as we provided in that response, there  are actually two 
employees who are double counted. The numbers of our band 2s have not increased, but the people held against 
those roles have.  
Senator HUME:   Right. It shows that the number of senior executive band 2 staff ha s increased by nearly 60 
per cent, but you say that's because somebody is on long -term leave.  
Ms Hinder :  We have one officer on long -term leave at the moment, so there was double counting in relation 
to that. But there  have  also been periods where, for instance, staff have come in, been on leave and then been 
replaced but there's been a slight period of overlap.  
Senator HUME:   Can you then confirm for me that the number of parliamentary executive level 1 and 2 staff 
is now at the highest level on record . 
Ms Hinder :  For our PEL staff —is that what you're referring to , or SES staff?  
Senator HUME:   How about both?  
Ms Hinder :  The PEL numbers have certainly increased , and th ey're the numbers that we've provided —that's 
the parliamentary executive level staff numbers. If you have a look, i n 2012 -13 the number for our PEL2s was 50, 
and at the moment that's at 76. That's an increase of 26 positions. For our PEL1  number s, there's been  a similar 
rise, from 114 to now 212. 
Senator HUME:   I want to ask about some communication that was sent out this week saying  that there's been 
a relocation of around  90 DPS staff from Parliament House  to the W est Block building. Forgive me , where is the 
West Block building ? 
Ms Hinder :  There's a building right at the base of the ramp, West Block . It's Australia's oldest 
Commonwealth building , and the Department of Parliamentary Services has relocated there.  
Senator HUME:   What's the cause of that move?  
Ms Hinder :  At the moment, if I can be honest , finding spaces for the agencies and departments that work in 
Parliament House is the world's biggest game of Jenga. We also have a number of required capital works that are 
required to take place at Parliament House , and that's going to have the Department of Parliamentary Services 
relocate  down to West Block. We're also going to be using West Block as a decanting space to take staff from 
Parliament House while we finish required works  here at Parliament House. Some staff will return , but the 
majority of DPS staff will be based at West Block.  
Senator HUME:   You don't think that the services provided by DPS are going to be impacted by being located 
off site? Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 9 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Hinder :  No, absolutely not. That's first and foremost in our mind , and it's something that we take very 
seriously.  
Senator HUME:   How does DPS go about doing something like that?  It's a  big job preparing people to move 
off site and picking a location. Why was West Block picked?  
Ms Hinder :  I wasn't here when West Block was chosen, but I understand that West Block was chosen because 
of its very close proximity to the precinct.  
Senator HUME:   When was it chosen?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  We can take that on notice.  
Senator HUME:   But it was before you arrived.  
Ms Hinder :  Yes. 
Senator HUME:   When did you arrive?  Sorry; I should know this.  
Ms Hinder :  October.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you. What's the  arrangement with the building?  We don't own the building, do we?  
Ms Hinder :  No. 
The President:   We used to own it, till Senator Cormann sold it.  
Senator HUME:   How much are we paying for the lease on that building?  
Ms Hinder :  Just give me one second to get  that. Sorry; I'm trying to be too clever and putting too many things 
on iPads.  
Senator HUME:   With West Block at the moment, what are our total lease costs?  
Ms Hinder :  I'll get you the exact number on a month -by-month basis, but since the time of us taking over the 
lease, which was in June of last year, we've paid approximately $3.7 million in rent as the tenant of West Bloc k. 
Senator HUME:   Have there been fit -out works done?  
Ms Hinder :  There have been fit -out works done. Those costs are split between the department in terms of its 
fit-out cost and also the landlord, because that was the part of the agreement reached with the landlord. The total 
for that cost for the department has been $17.2 million.  
Senator HUME:   Okay , and I'm assuming that the work that was done  was contracted . It was n't very fine 
joinery st uff. 
Ms Hinder :  No, it was not done in -house.  
Senator HUME:   Okay, good. Whe n were people first told that  they'd  be moving to West Block?  
Ms Hinder :  Communications on West Block have been happening quite consistently over the last 12 months 
and certainly heating up over the last six months.  
Senator HUME:   Were there  any concerns raised by staff about the move?  
Ms Hinder :  I don't want to categorise them as being 'any concerns ' at all. In fact, I can say  quite categorically 
that everyone that's  gone to West Block is exceedingly happy about being at West Block. But I think you 'd also 
understand that a lot of staff feel a very strong tie to Australian Parliament House and have been concerned that 
they might lose that sense of a strong tie to the operations of the House. But , again, after being in West Block now 
for the last fortnight, overwhelmingly, we have colleagues telling us that it's been a great move, and they're also 
splitting their time when needed between Parliament House and West Block.  
Senator HUME:   My understanding is that the relocation was officially complete d on Monday night and that 
was when the communication — 
Ms Hinder :  No, Senator. We had two phases. The first phase occurred approximately two weeks ag o, and 
about 90 staff moved from Parliament House down to West Block. On Monday of this week, we relocated 
approximately 265 staff from our secondary office at National Circuit , and they've now joined at West Block.  
Senator HUME:   Did the $17.2 million fit -out take all of the time from the start  of the lease back in June last 
year up until move date?  
Ms Hinder :  I think the fit -out has been ongoing through that time. However, I will note that there was a 
period of time when the first planned relocation for the department down to West Block was delayed, and I can 
say that that delay was not caused by the actions of DPS.  
Senator HUME:   What was the delay caused by, then?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 10 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Hinder :  The landlord is required for all of the external fit -out and all of the work to happen on the 
building , and there were  some delays in the completion of that work.  
Senator HUME:   You can understand  the fact that there's a $17.2 million fit out, $3 million in rent, for an 
office that's been sitting empty for around six months. Is that something that has concerned you?  
Ms Hinder :  I can say that we have raised those concerns with the landlord. We have reached a commercial 
arrangement with the landlord in relation to the delays for the department to go to West  Block.  
Senator HUME:   Alright. Thank you.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you  all for appearing again. Ms Hinchcliffe , last November  I asked you a series 
of questions , and you and your department have plain refused to answer the questions I've put to you. You've 
raised no public interest immunity claim. Ms Hinchcliffe, you are the Secretary of the Department of 
Parliamentary Services. You cannot expect us to believe that you don't know the proper process is to raise a 
public interest immunity claim, not simply flat-out refuse to answer questions. You know a public interest claim 
is the correct process, don't you?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  The questions on notice that you've raised —and, I'm sorry, I need to find them — 
Senator ROBERTS:   Question 116.  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  We have provided an answer to those questions and those answers have been submitted. I 
suspect  what you'd like to say to me is that those answers are not the answers that you're looking for and you'd 
like to press me in relation to those . But we have provided answers to those questions.  
Senator ROBERTS:   In question on notice  116, I asked you about your predecessor , Rob Stefani c, who  
stepped down in absolute controversy, yet you still won't explain why he stepped down. That's the answer I'm 
looking for . Why did he step down?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  That's not a question for me.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Who is it a question for?  
The President:   It's a question for the presiding officer.  
Senator ROBERTS:   President, why did Rob Stefani c step down?  
The President:   I provided an opening statement at the last estimates , at which I said we had lost trust and 
confidence in Mr Stefani c.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I asked whether Rob Stefani c intercepted a letter of an employee making a public 
interest disclosure , contradicting an affidavit that he made in court . The answer to that question is contained in 
document s that you have access to, both of you.  
The President:   Do you mean  me, Senator Roberts ? 
Senator ROBERTS:   Yes.  
The President:   I don't have access to those documents . 
Senator ROBERTS:   Who does?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I'm not sure what documents you're talking about. As I said to you at the last estimates that 
you raised these, these matters are matters that pre -date me. I don't know what occurred. It seems to me that 
question , of what Mr Stefani c did, is a question for Mr Stefani c rather than a question for me.  
Senator ROBERTS:   It's either you or the President, the presiding officer . 
Ms J Hinchcliffe :   In terms of Mr Stefani c's actions ? 
Senator ROBERTS:   Why Mr Stefani c stepped down . 
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Sorry , what — 
Senator ROBERTS:   Why did Mr Stefani c step down?  
The President:   I've answered that question : because the presiding officers lost trust and confidence in the 
secretary.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Did he intercept a letter of an employee making a public interest disclosure , and did that 
not contradict an affidavit given in court? Did he or not?  
The President:   Who 's the question to , sorry ? 
Senator ROBERTS:   You.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 11 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  The President:   I've indicated that those are proceedings I have no knowledge  of and nothing to do with. That 
is not my role as the President.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Who would have knowledge of that?  
The President:   I have no idea , I'm very sorry. That's not a question for me.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Do you have knowledge of that, Ms Hinchcliffe?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I don't, and I've said before  that I don't have knowledge of that.  
Senator ROBERTS:   So no-one knows why he stepped down . 
The President:   I've answered th at question twice now, and I've answered it a third time. I made an opening 
statement at the last estimates  at which I said the presiding officers had lost trust and confidence in Mr Stefani c.  
Senator ROBERTS:   What are the details around that , and was his intercepting of a letter of an employee 
making a public interest disclosure , contradicting an affidavit  given to court , part of the reason  for losing trust?  
The President:   I indicated in my opening statement that I was not able to provide any further information. 
The letter that you 've talked about, I have absolutely no knowledge of at all. I know nothing about it.  
CHAIR:   Senator  Roberts , I think that answers your question —in that it was not a relevant factor in losing 
confidence if the President didn't know about it.  
Senator ROBERTS:   You're required to produce to this committee any information or document s that we 
request. There's no privacy, security, freedom of information or other legislation that overrides this committee's 
constitutional powers to gather evidence . And both of you are protected from any potential prosecution as a result 
of your evidence or in producing documents to this committee. As I understand it, President, the default position 
of senators is that the Senate prevails. So unless you can come up with a public interest immunity, we are 
constitutional ly empowered to fulfil our duty to taxpayers.  
The President:   I'll re -table my statement from last time. I made it clear that the presiding officers had lost 
trust and confidence in the secretary and that it was not able to discuss , at that point , further matters in relation to 
the secretary. In relation to the matter that you are raising, a legal matter, whether it was me as a presiding officer 
or the previous presiding officers, which is where I understand this matter has its genesis, none of us would 
have —it's not our role as presidents to have that level of depth of knowledge about court proceedings  or DPS 
operations. That is not the role of the presiding officers.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Who oversees that? Whose role is it? Surely there's someone with that role?  
The President:   A court matter is a court matter. It's nothing to do with the department.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I'm talking about whether or not he intercepted a letter of an employee making a public 
interest disclosure. Did he or did he not , and  who would be aware of that? Surely , someone must be?  
The President:   Ms Hinchcliffe has answered the question to the best of her ability. I have indicated , on a 
number of occasions, it's not my role as the President.  I have no knowledge of the matters you're raising. We have 
answered your questions. I don't know what else I can do.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Well, I've got a new question.  
The President:   These are matters which go back to previous presiding officers and previous DPS executive  
officers . 
Senator ROBERTS:   Mr Stefanic left a rotten legacy. I want to know whether  or not  he intercepted a letter to 
an employee making a public interest disclosure, contradicting an affidavit he gave to court.  
The President:   Senator Roberts, I would hate for the DPS staff who are watching this to think  that they are 
dirty and rotten . They are fine officers . They do an amazing job.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I didn't say that.  
The President:   I think that's what you're implying. I took that as — 
Senator ROBERTS:   I said he left a rotten legacy.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts, don't speak over the President.  
The President:   I'm not making a comment about that. The Presiding Officers acted swiftly . We lost trust and 
confidence, and he was terminated. We acted very swiftly in filling the position  with Ms Hinchcliffe , and what we 
hope and what we're looking forward to and what is currently happening within DPS  is that we are restoring trust 
and confidence within th at department. That is our role.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 12 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ROBERTS:   I'll say it again. He left a rotten legacy. Many of your fine employees have come to me 
telling me of that , and still they're  very concerned about the legacy he left —what he actually did. I will ask  if you 
can take it on notice to find out whether or not he intercepted a letter of an employee making a public interest 
disclosure , contradict ing an affidavit given to court.  
The President:   I can't take that on notice  because it's  not my business.  
Senator ROBERTS:   If you don't know , then tell me who does  know. Who should that question — 
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I've already said to you that I don't know  that information and that the person who would 
know that information is Mr Stefanic.  
The President:   This is a court matter . It's not a DPS  matter. It was a court matter . 
Senator ROBERTS:   He was paid by taxpayers, as are we —all three of us . We all have a responsibility, don't 
we, to taxpayers?  
The President:   Absolutely.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Why are you disrespecting the Senate and the taxpayer in this?  
The President:   Senator Roberts, you are asking me about a court matter . If you ask me about a DPS matter,  of 
course I wil l answer to the best of my ability , and it will be a truthful and transparent answer. I can't comment in 
court matters. They 're not my purview. I am responsible  for the running  of Parliament House, DPS, the PBO and 
the Department of the Senate. That is the extent of my responsibilities.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I'm asking a simple question. Who is responsible? Who can I ask this question  of?  
The President:   Ms Hinchcliffe just told you:  the previous secretary . It's his matter . It's a  court matter . It's not 
a DPS matter.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Someone oversaw it. He intercepted a letter of an employee making a public interest 
disclosure . Surely that affects everyone , ultimately.  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  Senator, I've answered your question . I don't have any knowledge of this . The person who 
you would need to ask is Mr Stefanic. If yo u're asking about his actions, you would need to ask him.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Ms Hinchcliffe, your department and what you do is immune to freedom of information 
request s. The only chance the Australian taxpayers and  the fine employees of DPS  have to hold you and the 
department accountable for your conduct  is through questions we , as senators, ask. I've asked you to provide 
answers , and you've point blank refused. How are you meant to be accountable and transparent if you don't 
answer questions this senator puts to  you?  
The President:   That characterisation is incorrect. The secretary has not refused . She has answered questions 
to the best of her ability . Both Ms Hinchcliffe and her staff are working very, very hard to restore trust and 
confidence not only within DPS  but with all senators in this room. Of course  we have a responsibility to answer 
your questions as they relate to DPS. This does not relate to DPS. It relates to a former secretary on a court 
matter. I can't be any clear er on that.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I understand that , but it  still remains the fact that apparently he intercepted a letter of a 
DPS employee making a public interest disclosure. That must bother someone. Please,  someone.  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I've answered the question about my knowledge of this matter and who you would need to 
ask about whether or not Mr Stefanic intercepted the letter. I don't know the answer to that . You would need to 
ask him.  
Senator ROBERTS:   So there is no -one— 
The President:   I think the actions that the Presiding Officers took  in terminating the previous secretary 
indicate  that we are very concerned about DPS and its reputation , so to suggest that no -one cares is, again, an 
incorrect characterisation. We acted as swiftly as we could. The secretary was terminated. We've acted extremely 
quickly to replace  him, and I am very optimistic that with the new leadership a t DPS we have a very, very 
exciting future.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts, we will need to conclude. We may be here next week for you to continue 
questioning.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Can I just have one more question?  
CHAIR:   One more, and then the coalition has the call.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 13 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ROBERTS:   It must bother your employees —taxpayer employees , whom you serve and  for whom 
you are responsible —that someone wrote a letter and that letter was intercepted in making a public interest 
disclosure . Why does that not raise  a simple answer in you to say, 'I will find out '?  
Ms J Hinchcliffe :  I've answered your questions here today about my knowledge of this matter and about who 
you would need to ask about your suggestion that the secretary intercepted a letter. I've been very clear with this 
committee about my views on the use of taxpayers ' money : that everything that we do as a department is spending 
taxpayers' money and we need to be very clear that we are getting value for money. You heard the conversation I 
just had with Senator Hume on that matter and the work that I'm doing to ensure that we are really clear in the 
department that  we are spending taxpayers ' money wisely and well to support each of you in your business here in 
parliament. That is what  we are  here to do.  
Senator ROBERTS:   You've had 14 senior executive service staff leave  their senior  positions in the last three 
years. That tells me something.  
The President:   If I could state —I think it should be on the record —I think the matter you're referring to is a 
matter that goes back to 2018.  
Senator ROBERTS:   And when did Mr Stefanic leave? When was he removed?  
The President:   In December . 
Senator ROBERTS:   Of 2024 . That's six years  in which he was doing — 
The President:   But n one of the officers at the table, including me, including the current government , had 
anything at all to do with this matter.  
Senator ROBERTS:   That speaks to low accountability  in your predecessors.  
The President:   It's seven years ago, Senator Roberts.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you, Chair.  
CHAIR:   Senator Colbeck,  you have the call.  
Senator COLBECK:   I want to go back to the $35,000 sit-stand desk  for a moment. Has any senator  or 
member seen this new desk?  
CHAIR:   I love mine.  
Ms Hinder :  I don't believe so, but I'll take that on notice. It was still in the prototype stage.  
Senator COLBECK:   I'm a huge fan of this building and its  design principles , and, as a carpenter and joiner 
by trade  and having built a few desks , I'm really interested in the process for this . I understand the concept of 
maintaining the design principles of our offices —like Senator Pratt, I like my desk —but I've got to say  that when 
I was contracting I would have  felt like I'd been shot up the bum with a rainbow if I got a contract for 35 grand to 
design and build a prototype of a desk.  
Senator SHELDON:   Is there a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow?  
Senator COLBECK:   I don't think so ! What is the process to assess it? You've  been through the design 
process . You've buil t a desk. W hat is the process to assess it now if none of us have seen it ? 
Ms Hinder :  What we will be doing, as the secretary has indicated, is having a  think  about the future program 
of the sit -stand desk arrangements. Part of that, as the secretary has also reflected, is the need for us to be able to 
make sure we are actually providing something that senators and members want. The secretary and I are  
committed to being able to make sure that if we do go through a rollout of something like this, which is based 
upon the request of members and senators, we 're delivering what you need. As part of that process , we will be 
making sure that members and senators have access to have a  look at the desk. Also, as  the secretary has 
indicated, we will be having a very strong think and consulting  with the moral rights holders around  what it is that 
we can do in the most cost  effective manner.  
Senator COLBECK:   Has modification of our existing furniture been considered ? Is it part of that process?  
Ms Hinder :  I'll take it on notice to provide absolute confirmation. However, my understanding is that the 
desks that are currently in place are the desks that were originally installed at the time of the opening of the 
parliament . They are incredibly difficult to retrofit to be able to make them a sit/stand desk option. However, as 
I've indicated as well , we are having a very big think about what this actually means. Is it possible to be able to 
maintain the design integrity of the building but look for different alternatives in relation to the options that we 
can provide members and senators? The secretary is very committed to making sure that , as we are going through 
this sort of process where things are going to need the input of members and senators so that we can be confident Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 14 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  in the future that we 're actually providing you with what you need, members and senators feedback is going to be 
key. 
Senator COLBECK:   I look forward to the consultation . Thank you.  
CHAIR:   Thank you to Department of Parliamentary Services  and to the Parliamentary Service Commissioner.  
The President:   Chair, is this department — 
CHAIR:   Yes, you're released because we didn't call the other parts of parliament.  
The President:   So this department's released. It's not required on Monday?  
CHAIR:   No, you're not released for Monday, just for today.  
The President:   Thank you for that.   Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 15 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  PRIME MINISTER AND CABINET PORTFOLIO  
In Attendance  
Senator Wong, Minister for Foreign Affairs  
Senator Gallagher, Minister for Finance , Minister for Government Services , Minister for the Public Service , 
Minister for Women  
Governance and Corporate Group  
Mr Martin Hehir PSM, Deputy Secretary and Chief Operating Officer  
Mr Andrew Walter, First Assistant Secretary, Government Division  
Mr Arthur Spyrou, First Assistant Secretary, Ministerial Support Division  
Ms Callie Zorzi, First Assistant Secretary, Corporate Division  
Mr Justin Keefe, First Assistant Secretary, Digital, Security and Workplace Operations Division  
Ms Pauline Sullivan, First Assistant Secretary, Cabinet Division  
Ms Alison Green, Assistant Secretary, Protocol and International Visits Branch  
Mr Ben Keily, Assistant Secretary, Ministerial and Parliamentary Support Branch  
Mr Branko Ananijevski, Assistant Secretary, Cabinet Information and Governance Branch  
Ms Bridie Costigan, Acting Assistant Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat Branch  
Ms Cristy England, Assistant Secretary and Chief People Officer, People Branch  
Mr David Belgrove, Assistant Secretary, Parliamentary and Government Branch  
Mr Greg Baldwin, Acting Assistant Secretary, Business Services Branch  
Ms Karyn Cooper, Assistant Secretary and Chief Finance Officer, Finance Branch  
Ms Katy Lin, Assistant Secretary, Legal Policy Branch  
Ms Leonie Kolmar, Assistant Secretary, Communications Branch  
Ms Liz Caelli, Acting Assistant Secretary, Governance, Performance and Audit Branch  
Social Policy Group  
Mr Blair Exell, Deputy Secretary  
Ms Greta Doherty, First Assistant Secretary, Social Policy Division  
Ms Lee Steel, First Assistant Secretary, Intergovernmental Relations and Reform Division  
Ms Caitlin Delaney, Assistant Secretary, Education and Immigration Branch  
Ms Erin Rule, Assistant Secretary, Human Services Branch  
Mr Tim Johnson, Assistant Secretary, Care and Support and Aged Care Branch  
Economy, Industry and Resilience Group  
Ms Nadine Williams, Deputy Secretary  
Ms Christina Garbin, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Economic Division  
Ms Janet Quigley, First Assistant Secretary, Resilience and Crisis Management Division  
Ms Lisa Elliston, First Assistant Secretary, Strategy, Projects and Priorities Division  
Ms Narelle Luchetti, First Assistant Secretary, Industry, Infrastructure and Environment Division  
Mr Jason Dymowski, Assistant Secretary, Resilience, Recovery and Response Branch  
Ms Joanna Abhayaratna, Assistant Secretary, Office of Impact Analysis  
International and Security Group  
Mr Graham Fletcher, Deputy Secretary  
Mr Tony Sheehan, Head, Royal Commission into Defence and Veteran Suicide Implementation Taskforce  
Dr Angelia Grant, First Assistant Secretary and G20 Sherpa, Multilateral Economic Engagement Division  
Mr David Titheridge, Acting First Assistant Secretary, International Division  
Ms Kendra Morony, First Assistant Secretary, National Security Division  
Mr Richard Sadleir, First Assistant Secretary, Quad, AUKUS and Naval Shipbuilding Division  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 16 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Frances Finney PSM, Assistant Secretary, Defence and Veterans' Services Commission  
Office for Women  
Ms Padma Raman PSM, Executive Director  
Ms Megan Leahy, First Assistant Secretary  
Ms Clancie Hall, Assistant Secretary  
Ms Hester Green, Acting Assistant Secretary  
Ms Telitha Schroedl, Acting Assistant Secretary  
Workplace Gender Equality Agency  
Hon. Mary Wooldridge, Chief Executive Officer  
Australian Public Service Commission  
Dr Gordon De Brouwer PSM, Australian Public Service Commissioner  
Ms Jo Talbot, Acting Deputy Commissioner, Integrity, Reform and Enabling Services  
Dr Subho Banerjee, Deputy Commissioner, Head of APS Academy and Capability  
Ms Ashley Sedgwick, Assistant Commissioner, Workforce Strategies  
Ms Faye Liu, Assistant Commissioner, Australian Public Service Craft and Learning  
Ms Justine Curnow, Assistant Commissioner, Australian Public Service Reform  
Ms Kate Boxsell, Assistant Commissioner, Leadership and Talent Development  
Ms Kylie Barber, Assistant Commissioner, Integrity, Performance and Employment Policy  
Mr Matthew Bowd, Assistant Commissioner, Executive Remuneration and Statutory Offices  
Ms Melanie Mcintyre, Assistant Commissioner, General Counsel  
Dr Nicole Steele, Assistant Commissioner, Workforce Metrics Modernisation Program  
Ms Paula Stratton, Acting Assistant Commissioner, Integrity, Performance and Employment Policy  
Mr Shyam Raghupathi, Acting Assistant Commissioner, Professions and Pathways  
Dr Steven Munns, Assistant Commissioner, Diversity and Inclusion  
Mr James O'Reilly, Acting First Assistant Commissioner, Workplace Reform and Diversity  
Mr Tom Georgilas, Acting Assistant Commissioner, Enabling Services  
Ms Toni Dam, Acting Assistant Commissioner, People Insights  
Mr Mark Davidson, Acting Merit Protection Commissioner, Merit Protection Commissioner  
Ms Christine Shannon, Executive Director, International  
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet  
[09:59]  
CHAIR:   I welcome Senator the Hon. Penny Wong, Minister for Foreign Affairs , representing the Prime 
Minister ; Mr Martin Hehir, deputy secretary and chief operating officer ; and other officers of the Department of 
the Prime Minister and Cabinet. Minister, do you have an opening statement  this morning ? 
Senator Wong:   I do have a brief statement, Chair.  
CHAIR:   Thank you.  
Senator Wong:   Thank you , Chair ; thank you committee members. The world has thrown a lot of challenges 
at Australia over the past few years and today , because of the hard work Australians have done together, our 
economy is turning a corner. We see inflation down, wages up, unemployment low and interest rates starting to 
fall. We have achieved all of this as Australians do —looking after each other and working together . 
We're  stepping up  to help with cost of living whilst getting inflation down.  This week, the government handed 
down our fourth budget, which builds on the foundations we have laid, delivering cost-of-living relief, which 
remains our top priority , and securing our nation's future at a time of global uncertainty.  The budget builds a 
stronger economy with more energy relief for every household and small business , more bulk-billing to help 
Australians see a GP for free , more cuts to HECS debts, historic funding for Australian schools and more help to 
get Australians into a home of their own.  
We are also delivering two more tax cuts to every Australian taxpayer in 2026 and 2027, adding to the major 
tax relief we delivered in July of last year. Combined with Labor's first round of tax cuts, the average tax cut is Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 17 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  expected to be $43 a week or more than $2,200 next year and more than $2,500 the year after. It's a bit of extra 
help for every taxpayer and it tops up our tax cuts that started flowing on 1 July last year.  
We're delivering for every Australian and we are doing it our way . We're not copying from other countries, but 
investing in things that work for us. Senators will recall the 2014 budget and its shocking cuts to health and 
education. The Albanese government will not let Australia go back down that road. We won't put the hard work 
Australians have done at risk by cutting the services people count on or by denying families the help they need. 
We will keep creating opportunity, investing in our people and building Australia's future.  
Chair, since we last met the Trump administration has decided to apply tariffs on all imports of steel and 
aluminium. Imposing new tariffs is a central plank of President Trump's economic agenda. Senators may recall 
that, in its first term, the previous Trump administration exempted dozens of countries from steel and aluminium 
tariffs. They now say that they regret having provided those exemptions, and this time not one country was 
exempted.  
The Albanese government's response to the Trump administration's imposition o f tariffs on Australia has been 
firm and it has been clear. The decision is entirely unjustified and against the spirit of our two nation's enduring 
friendship. We will continue to advocate for Australian exporters through every available channel , just as we have 
been doing with regard to the reciprocal  tariffs foreshadowed by President Trump . And we will continue to work 
to diversify Australia's markets.  
In 2024, 4.6 per cent of Australia's total goods exports were to the US market, meaning Australia's less exposed 
to the US than many other countries. Indeed, India recently overtook the United States as Australia's fourth -
largest goods export market. Nevertheless, this is a time for Australians to come together, it is a time for Australia 
to be united. I have been disturbed to hear some who pretend to leadership trying to use this as a political 
opportunity.  
We will always stand up for Australia. We are an independent nation. We will keep working hard for the best 
outcome. And we are simply not willing to trade away the things that make Australia the best country in the 
world, like Medicare, the PBS and our healthcare system. I look forward to our discussion today.  
CHAIR:   Thank you, Minister.  Senator  Cash?  
Senator CASH:   Minister, since we last spoke at estimates has the Prime Minister spoken with Prime Minister 
Netanyahu?  
Senator Wong:   Graham?  
Mr Fletcher :  I'll ask Mr Titheridge to respond to that  question . 
Mr Titheridge :  No, Senator.  
Senator CASH:   Would you be able to confirm , for the record , when the Prime Minister last sp oke with Prime 
Minister Netanyahu . 
Mr Titheridge :  The last time the Prime Minister spoke to Prime Minister Netanyahu was on 3 April 2024.  
Senator CASH:   Minister, the Prime Minister hasn't spoken to Mr Netanyahu since our last estimates. It's now 
been confirmed again that he last spoke to the Prime Minister of Israel on 3 April 2024. Has the Prime Minister 
had any other form of communication with Prime Minister Netanyahu?  
Senator Wong:   I'd have to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Perhaps I could ask one of the officials . They  may have more knowledge than you  do. 
Mr Titheridge :  Not that I'm aware of.  
Senator CASH:   Minister, i s Prime Minister Netanyahu welcome on Australian soil ? 
Senator Wong:   I don't believe  that Prime Minister Netanyahu is seeking a visit to Australia at this point.  
Senator CASH:   Is he welcome on Australian soil?  
Senator Wong:   That' s a hypothetical.  
Senator CASH:   It's not a hypothetical, because I can assure you that, under a Dutton government , he would 
be welcome here . Is he welcome on Australian soil under you as the foreign minister and Mr Albanese as the 
Prime Minister?  
Senator Wong:   That is a hypothetical , and I won't be responding to it.  
Senator CASH:   You've just sent a very clear message across Australia to Jewish Australians that you are 
unable to answer  whether or not , under your government and under your leadership as our foreign minister , the 
Prime Minister of Israel is welcome on Australian soil . Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 18 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Wong:   I'm happy to respond to this. We all understand why you're asking the se questions , and you 
flagged that yourself by  your reference to the Australian Jewish community.  
Senator McGRATH:   What do you mean by that?  
Senator CASH:   Yes, what do you mean by that? Please tell . 
Senator Wong:   In the context of this  discussion — 
Senator CASH:   We get asked that question — 
CHAIR:   Senator Cash , you asked the question , and let the minister take the time in answering.  
Senator Wong:   Thank you. It is the case that we have seen a really awful conflict in Gaza. And I'm willin g, 
obviously,  to talk about this tomorrow with our officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. We 
saw the horrific actions of the terrorist group Hamas on 7 October , and t he largest loss of Jewish life since the 
Holocaust  was undertaken by a terrorist group that seeks not only the destruction of the State of Israel but the 
destruction of the Jewish people. We saw the taking of hostages , and we continue to call for the release of 
hostages, just as we continue to call for a ceasefire and the application of international humanitarian law.  
You and I both know that this is a conflict that has generated a great deal of division in the Australian 
community.  I would say two points  to you . The first  is that Australia is not a central player in all of this, and the 
second point is  to listen to what Mr Burgess from ASIO said, which is that it is important for us to dial down the 
temperature here domestically. We've seen awful anti semitic acts and language. We've also seen awful 
Islam ophobic attacks , language and threats. I think it's incumbent upon all of us to do what we can  to not bring 
the conflict here.  
Senator McGRATH:   Is that why you don't want Prime Minister Netanyahu here?  
Senator Wong:   I've answered the question.  
Senator CASH:   You haven't answered the question , with all due respect.  
Senator Wong:   I have, actually. I'm not responding to a hypothetical. What I would say  is we have a 
longstanding — 
Senator CASH:   For the Jewish people in Australia  it is not a hypothetical , in terms of whether or not the 
Prime Minister of Israel is actually welcome in Australia under your leadership as the foreign minister and the 
Prime Minister of this country.  
CHAIR:   Senator  Cash, the minister has answered the question.  
Senator Wong:   Sorry, I will respond in this way, Senator. The Labor Party, alongside the international 
community, was involved in the establishment of the State of Israel. I've spoken about the imperative of the 
existence of the S tate of Israel , but I've also spoken about the importance of international humanitarian law , and 
that is a matter of principle. We continue to call for hostages to be released , we continue to call for a ceasefire and 
we continue to call for the application or the observance of international humanitarian law so that civilians are 
protected, and for aid to flow. That is a principle position. I do not think I have heard you, once, talk about 
international  humanitarian law, the protections of civilians, or the fact that we have seen 50,000 Palestinians who 
have died in this conflict. I think we have to hold to principle here and we also have to do all we can as leaders to 
not bring the conflict here.  
Senator CASH:   So can I just confirm the Albanese government's position is not to bring the conflict here  and, 
in planning to do that , is leaving  open the possibility that Australia may well arrest the Prime Minister of Israel 
should he come here?  
Senator Wong:   They're your words — 
Senator CASH:   Okay. Well, let's go to the ICC — 
Senator Wong:   and I think everyone can see your motivation behind them , Senator Cash. I think everyone 
can see your motivation behind  that.  
Senator CASH:   We stand with Israel.  
Senator McGRATH:   We stand with the democracy.  
Senator CASH:   We stand with Israel. We stand with the democracy. And we are prepared to say that Prime 
Minister Netanyahu is welcome here under a Dutton government.  
Senator Wong:   In relation to these issue, I'm certainly not going to be lectured  by you about support for the 
Jewish community. As I've said to you, you were one of signatories to the advertisement that called for the 
abolition of 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act, a provision which made it unlawful for someone to do an act Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 19 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  that is reasonably likely to offend, humiliate, insult  or intimidate someone because of their race or their ethnicity. 
You supported that being removed. The provision in federal legislation which protects Jewish  Australians from 
being offended, insulted, humiliated or intimidated —you supported the removal of that protection. So I don't 
think anyone is going to take a lecture from you about this sort of hatred, because you stood with Mr Brandis 
when he said, 'People have a right to  be a bigot .' 
Senator CASH:   That's as good as you 've got  in answer t o the question , is it, to defend your government's 
position?  
CHAIR:   Senator Cash — 
Senator McGRATH:   Senator Pratt, we don't need you running interference , please .  
Senator CASH:   Minister, has the Prime Minister — 
Senator Wong:   You don't need to speak to the chair like that. That's just rude.  
Senator McGRATH:   Well, t he chair does not need to run interference to protect you because you're unable to 
answer a basic question.  
CHAIR:   Senator  McGrath , you're not asking a question.  
Senator Wong:   Senator McGrath, please stop being so aggressive. Please stop being  so aggressive.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm not aggressive, Senator Wong. I'm disappointed in your tone  and disrespect to 
Senator Cash — 
Senator SHELDON:   Chair, p oint of order — 
Senator Wong:   You don't need to be so aggressive. You don't need — 
CHAIR:   I have a point of order before me .  
Senator Wong:   Sorry.  
CHAIR:   Senator Sheldon.  
Senator SHELDON:   If any of the senators that are asking the question s—they've got the call. If somebody 
else wants to get the  call, or they want to move a point of order, they ask for the chair's attention, and then they 
ask a question.  
CHAIR:   Thank you , Senator Sheldon . That's  very helpful, because it would also be helpful to the committee 
if coalition senators didn't shout over each other at those giving evidence  or at me as a chair.  
Senator McGRATH:   Stop r unning interference — 
CHAIR:   Please, you have the call.  
Senator Wong:   Don't be rude.  
Senator CASH:   Minister , the International Criminal Court has issued a warrant for Prime Minister 
Netanyahu's arrest , but the International Criminal Court has made it clear that a government, including the 
Albanese government, can refuse , in its absolute discretion , to enforce an arrest warrant. As a matter of 
government policy, does the Albanese Labor government intend to arrest Prime Minister Netanyahu if he came to 
Australia?  
Senator Wong:   Well, I'm not speculating on that . And those are matters for the Attorney -General.  
Senator McGRATH:   Will you rule out arresting Prime Minister — 
Senator CASH:   You're the foreign minister ! That is fantastic . 
Senator Wong:   Sorry, Senator Cash. There's a thing called international law , and Australia is  party to the 
Rome statute.  
Senator CASH:   This is as good as it gets.  
Senator Wong:   Can I finish ? May I?  
Senator CASH:   Seriously . 
Senator Wong:   When you've finished.  
CHAIR:   Stop talking under your breath , Senator Cash.  
Senator Wong:   Australia is a party to the Rome statute , which established the International Criminal Court. 
That decision to do so was taken under a coalition government , and that sets out certain obligations and certain 
conditions around Australia's engagement with the international court. We respect the independence of the court . Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 20 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  We don't speculate on hypotheticals . And you would be aware —I would hope, as a former or shadow Attorney -
General previously, I think —that Mr Dreyfus as the Attorney -General is the relevant minister for these matters.  
Senator CASH:   I can assure you we would exercise our discretion. Has the Prime Minister requested you, in 
your capacity as foreign minister, to arrange any dialogue at a prime  ministerial level between our two nations? 
For example, have you spoken with the Israeli foreign  minister on behalf of the Prime Minister to try and arrange 
a dialogue?  
Senator Wong:   I engaged yesterday with the Israeli ambassador , and I will take on notice the previous 
engagements with foreign ministers and also through DFAT. That would be a matter for tomorrow.  
Senator McGRATH:   Can I just clarify something? In relation to Mr Netanyahu, you 're not ruling out that i f 
he comes to Australia he would be arrested .  
Senator Wong:   It is really interesting , the extent to which you wish to make this a political issue. We have 
said—because I understand precisely what you're trying to do — 
Senator McGRATH:   No, you don't.  I was just asking a question.  
Senator Wong:   and I think  anybody watching knows th is—we will not speculate on hypotheticals . Australia 
is a party to the Rome statute because of a decision of your government , which means we are a party to the statute 
which create d the International Criminal Court. In relation to those matters, as the Attorney -General has said , 
when he has been asked, he is not going to speculate on hypotheticals.  
Senator McGRATH:   So you're not ruling out the arrest of the democratically elected Prime Minister of one 
of our allies .  
Senator Wong:   I refer you to Mr Dreyfus's public statements on this.  
Senator McGRATH:   I am asking you , as you're representing the Prime Minister here .  
Senator Wong:   It is the Attorney -General of Australia who is the relevant minister , and I refer you to Mr 
Dreyfus's statements.  
Senator McGRATH:   So the Prime Minister of Australia is not ruling out arresting the democratically elected 
Prime Minister of one of our closest allies?  
Senator Wong:   I refer you to the statements of Mr Dreyfus, who is Australia's Attorney -General.  
Senator McGRATH:   For those who are listening, I can assure you that a Dutton -led government would 
certainly welcome Prime Minister Netanyahu to come to Australia and he certainly would not be arrested . There 
is a clear choice , at this coming election , between those who are on the side of democratically elected countries 
and those who refuse to rule out arresting someone.  
CHAIR:   This is not a debating chamber.  
Senator CASH:   Correct. It's a matter of government policy.   
Senator McGRATH:   This is a question of government policy. It is not speculation or a hypothetical.  
Senator Wong:   You correctly identif y there is a choice , and let me talk a little bit about the choice, given that 
you have . This is probably a matter for tomorrow, but I will make a point about Mr Dutton's recent and only what 
he billed as a major foreign -policy speech to the Lowy Institute last week, w hich simply demonstrated that Mr 
Dutton is not up to the job.  
In a major foreign -policy speech , he did not mention , once, India. He did not mention , once , Indonesia. He did 
not mention , once, Japan. He did not mention , once , South Korea. He mentioned no country in South -East Asia. 
He mentioned , not once , ASEAN. He mentioned , not once , the Quad . He mentioned , not once , Papua New 
Guinea. All are critical to our national security, our stability and our prosperity. It really shows the extent to 
which Mr Dutton is both  ignorant and ignoring  of our region, which is nothing short of reckless  So, if you want to 
talk about a choice, a prime minister who has deeply engaged with the region  and whose first visit was to Japan 
and the Quad meeting , which is critical for Australia's security — 
Senator McGRATH:   And who refuses to rule out arresting an elected prime minister of another country.  So 
sad. 
Senator Wong:   Secondly, o ur first bilateral visit—I listened to you, Senator.  
Senator McGRATH:   This is a strong message to Jewish Australians.  
Senator Wong:   The strong message to Australians is Mr Dutton is not up to managing Australia's security in 
an uncertain world.  
Senator McGRATH:   He's not going to arrest the Prime Minister of Israel.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 21 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   A Chinese warship  did a lap  of Australia , and your Prime Minister wasn't told about it . 
Senator Wong:   Do you know what is extraordinary?  He has never visited, in his term as opposition leader, 
Japan — 
Senator McGRATH:   Tell us what  the Prime Minister was told about the caravan.  
Senator Wong:   and he has never visited Korea.  He has never visited any country in South -East Asia and has 
never visited the Pacific.  
Senator McGRATH:   The security services don't trust the Prime Minister.  
CHAIR:   Order , senators ! 
Senator Wong:   This bloke wants to tell people he's good on Australia's national security. He's entirely 
ignorant — 
Senator McGRATH:   He's so weak —the pretty boy Prime Minister.  
Senator CASH:   Chinese warships are doing laps around Australia. They're carrying out live -firing exercises 
and Virgin pilots are calling you.  
Senator Wong:   May I finish? You don't like the fact that — 
Senator McGRATH:   Your Prime Minister is weak.  
Senator Wong:   you pretend to be tough on national security , yet you abandon our region —just as you did in 
government.  
Senator CASH:   This is hilarious, seriously.  
Senator Wong:   Not one visit ; not one mention.  
Senator McGRATH:   Travelling overseas isn't an achievement.  
Senator Wong:   Can you imagine the map of Peter Dutton's world?  
Senator McGRATH:   Getting stamps in your passport is not an achievement.  
Senator Wong:   There's Australia and then there's no Indonesia, no ASEAN, no India, no Japan and no 
Korea —basically , there's no Asia. That's his vision of Australia in the world — 
Senator CASH:   Tell us about the Chinese warships!  
Senator Wong:   and how is that good for our security?  This is where our security lies. That's why deep 
engagement in our region, in the Quad — 
Senator McGRATH:   What did he do about the Chinese warships ? Nothing.  
Senator CASH:   So Chinese warships lapping Australia , with no knowledge  by the Australian government , is 
okay?  Wow.  
Senator Wong:   You have no answer.  
CHAIR:   Senators — 
Senator McGRATH:   You have no answers. You can't answer what the Prime Minister did about the Chinese 
warships.  
Proceedings suspended from 10:21 to 10:25  
Senator CASH:   Is the Prime Minister aware of the minister for the environment's recent decision to push the 
approval of the North West Shelf gas extension until 31 May, which would obviously be after the federal 
election?  
Senator Wong:   I assume —that decision is public.  
Senator CASH:   That doesn't answer my question.  
Senator Wong:   That decision is public.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, but that doesn't answer my question.  
Senator Wong:   I haven't discussed this matter with the Prime Minister.  
Senator CASH:   Does anybody at the table  know ? 
Senator Wong:   I haven't discussed that decision with the Prime Minister.  
Senator CASH:   When did the Prime Minister become aware of the minister for the environment's decision to 
push the approval of the North West Shelf gas extension until 31 May of this year?  
Senator Wong:   I'll have to take that on notice.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 22 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Are there any officials that could , potentially , help? We had officials that were able to help us 
with the government's stance on Israel . Are there officials that could help us on the North West Shelf gas  
extension ?  
Ms Williams :  No, I don't have any information on that . I would need  to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Minister, does the Prime Minister approve of the decision to , yet again, delay the approval?  
Senator Wong:   I think you asked me this in question time  or one of your colleagues did . I made a few points 
there , which I  will make again. The first is that the decision on the extension of the North West Shelf project has 
been before the state government for six years. I understand that it was received , maybe , only last month by the 
federal department.  
Senator CASH:   I think it was December of last year. Could you clarify that?  
Senator Wong:   The note I have is February , but I'm happy to look at that. That 's the advice to me. So six  
years state government, received by us in February — 
Senator CASH:   My understanding is 12 December . And that is incorrect evidence , then? 
Senator Wong:   And I 've said— 
Senator CASH:   Could we just confirm, then — 
Senator Wong:   You know I always come back and correct if — 
Senator CASH:   Could we just confirm with one of the officials — 
Senator Wong:   They're not the officials.  
Senator CASH:   was it 12 December?  
Senator Wong:   We will take that on notice , that you 're asking the wrong department that. I 'm responding to 
you, because I think it 's important , since you are seeking information about this . But the advice to me is that the 
final documentation , bringing it before the minister , was received in February. So c an everyone take a deep 
breath. I know that Senator Cash wants to create , again , politics around this a head of the election . It was before 
the state government for six years ; it's been before the federal minister since February of this year.  
Secondly, what we won't do,  Senator, is what Mr Morrison did. Mr Morrison played politics with an approval, 
which is what Mr Dutton is seeking to do. The politics Mr Morrison played was with PEP -11, and the comments 
that he made led to court  action and more uncertainty , so it led to a legal challenge . My recollection is the Federal 
Court said that because of his public comments the decision was infected by apprehended  bias. That meant the 
project was delayed and created more uncertainty. I would encourage you —and I know it is so tempting because 
you always want to have a political fight. It is before the environment minister under laws that were generated by 
your side of politics. Those laws require the environment minister to make a decision. I encourage you, if you are 
serious about Western Australian jobs, not to engage in the politicking that you are currently, because you know 
that could put at risk the approval process. That uncertainty is not good for Western Australian jobs, the Western 
Australian economy and the national economy.  
Senator CASH:   Minister, on behalf of the Prime Minister, do you know what the North West Shelf  project is?  
Given your statements that I want to politicise this, do you know what the North West Shelf  project is and what it 
means to Western Australia and to the national economy —but to Western Australians in particular?  
Senator Wong:   I think we are very well aware of the  importance of — 
Senator CASH:   No, no ; what is it?  
Senator Wong:   Hang on. I'm happy to take on notice , if you're asking , what the Prime Minister know s about 
it. I say to you  that the Prime Minister has been in Western Australia more times than Mr Morrison — 
Senator CASH:   We wish he wouldn't come there, let me assure you.  
Senator Wong:   That's very polite, very gracious , of you ! The Prime Minister has been to Western Australia 
more times, I think, than most previous prime ministers tha t I can recall. He's taken the cabinet, from memory, to 
the Pilbara. I know he engages with Woodside and other resources companies regularly  in the context of those 
visits but more generally, as do other ministers. As I said in the Senate yesterday, and when I was in Western 
Australia last week, we understand and know  the importance of Western Australia to the national economy. We 
know the importance of the resources sector to the national economy , which is why we are saying to Mr Dutton 
and to you, Senator Cash : don't do anything in relation to the North West Shelf decision that might delay that 
consideration  and create uncertainty. We've seen this movie before ; it's what Mr Morrison did in relation to a 
project prior to the last election. We  encourage the alternative government to take a more responsible approach.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 23 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   I'm going to ask you again : in relation to the North West Shelf project —and the Prime 
Minister t ravelling to Western Australi a is not an achievement —what is the Prime Minister's understanding of 
what the North West Shelf project is  and what it provides to every single Western Australian?  
Senator Wong:   I've responded to that.  
Senator CASH:   With all due respect, you haven't.  
Senator Wong:   I think everyone who is engaged in national politics understands the importance of LNG 
production to the LNG sector, including as  the export sector to Australia , so let's not play games on that. If you'd 
like me to provide anything more in terms of detail —this matter  is not for this department, but I'm happy to take it 
on notice , if there's something that you want me to take on notice , for the Prime Minister.  
Senator CASH:   Let me, for the benefit of committee, explain in very basic English what the North West 
Shelf project does for Western Australia, for Western Australians and  for the national economy , and w hy the state 
government has given its approval to the extension of the project for another few decades.  
Senator Wong:   Fifty  years.  
Senator CASH:   It's called affordable, reliable energy. That is what the  North West Shelf project is. It's the 
provision of affordable, reliable energy to Western Australians . How many times, Minister, on behalf of the Prime 
Minister, has the Minister for the Environment and Water now delayed making a decision on this project?  
Senator Wong:   That's not on behalf of the Prime Minister, that question.  
Senator CASH:   Does the Prime Minister know how many times the minister has delayed the extension of this 
project ? 
Senator Wong:   Since February? We are only in March.  
Senator CASH:   You've said, that is based on your knowledge, 12 December — 
Senator Wong:   Sorry; 12 December is when Western Australia published their approval. It's not when final 
documentation was seen federally. So you're wrong about that. If I'm wrong, I'm always happy to come in and 
confirm that evidence, but that's the advice that has been given to me. The second point is, as I said, this was six 
years before the state government. We've had it since February. I'm sure the Minister for the Environment and 
Water will consider it carefully. We have a longstanding history , through successive Labor governments , of 
support for the LNG sector, both export and domestic.  
Senator CASH:   You clearly don't speak to the gas industry.  
Senator Wong:   Actually, I do . 
Senator McGRATH:   You don't.  
Senator CASH:   Well , then, you know what they think of you.  
Senator Wong:   Actually, I do. Obviously, I'm not a domestic minister, but you might know, of course, that 
Japan and Korea are so important as the export markets for gas from Australia . And  the reliability of gas exports 
is something we have been engaging on, because, obviously, this is a discussion about both the export sector and 
the domestic sector.  
CHAIR:   We're due to break for morning tea.  
Proceedings suspended from 10:36 to 10:52  
CHAIR:   Senator Cash.  
Senator CASH:   If I could return to the line of questioning in relation to the Minister for the Environment  and 
Water  yet again delaying the decision in relation to the North West Shelf gas extension until 31 May , after the 
election . I want  to table  this, Senator Wong, just to ensure that, for the benefit of the committee , the dates that we 
have been talking about are on the record. It is an article printed off today but dated Thursday 12 December 2024, 
'WA environment minister Reece Whitby approves 50 -year extension of North West Shelf gas project '. 
Senator Wong:   Yes, that's what I said.  The state government approved it on 12 December after , I think , a six-
year process. As I understand it —and I 'll clarify the date ; I think I said the 12th —I'm advised that the 
Commonwealth received the critical technical report that they had requested on 5 February. But what I  would say 
to you is these are matters for a different department. This department and this minister, the Prime Minister, 
obviously  is not the minister responsible for this process.  
Senator CASH:   I completely understand that . And the relevant paragraphs of the letter  are:  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 24 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  In a statement, a spokesperson for the Australian government's Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and 
Water said the WA EPA's decision on the North West Shelf Project Extension recommenced the statutory decision -making 
time frame under national environmental law.  
"The minister [Tanya Plibersek] has 30 business days to make a decision on the North West Shelf Project Extension,"  they 
said. 
I understand the Prime Minister is not the relevant minister,  but he is the Prime Minister. This is an issue not just 
of national importance but of significant importance to Western Australia, hence my line of questioning in terms 
of the Prime Minister's knowledge of the minister for the environment's decision to yet again delay the granting or 
not of the approval to extend.  Was the Prime Minister or his office aware that the further announcement of the 
delay in making  the decision would be pushed out on budget day?  
Senator Wong:   The question is: was the Prime Minister or his office aware of when  the minister for the 
environment would make that decision public?  
Senator CASH:   Correct.  
Senator Wong:   I'll take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   I think Senator McGrath  has got a line of questioning now.  
CHAIR:   Senator McGrath?  
Senator McGRATH:   In the last round of estimates, Senator Wong, you refused to answer some pretty basic 
questions on whether the Prime Minister was briefed following the discovery of a caravan laden with explosives 
in Dural. On 10 March this year, the AFP Deputy Commissioner Krissy Barrett published a detailed statement on 
Operation Kissinger. The AFP disclosed the incident that we've been referring to was a fabricated terrorism plot 
by organised criminals. Ms Barrett stated:  
We believe the person pulling the strings wanted changes to their criminal status but maintained a distance from their scheme  
and hired alleged local criminals to carry out parts of their plan.  
However, the plan was foiled. An AFP operational strategy is in place to take action against this individual and I won 't make 
any further comment on that.  
A number of people have been identified as part of this fake terrorism plot and the AFP is working with local and overseas 
law enforcement officials in our bid to have all of those responsible brought to justice.  
Given these developments, I ask again: on what date and approximately what time was the Prime Minister first 
notified about this incident?  
Senator Wong:   I will make a point about Dural. The facts of the case, which have now been disclosed 
publicly by the AFP, indicate the fabrication —I think that was the phrase  used in the quote. Obviously that 
doesn't detract from the fear nevertheless that was generated by the reports and the publicity, particularly for the 
Australian Jewish community. I'd make that point first. Secondly, the principled approach the government and the 
Prime Minister have taken has been to ensure, unlike others, that we gave the AFP, New South Wales and other 
police forces the appropriate space and, frankly, confidentiality to do their work properly. I regret that that was 
not your approach, Senator McGrath. I'd refer you to the AFP evidence on the previous occasion about that. You 
and your colleagues persisted in asking questions, despite the fact that the Commissioner of the Australian 
Federal Police said that that did have the potential to compromise the investigation. What that speaks to is 
frankly — 
Senator McGRATH:   Like Premier Minns?  
Senator Wong:   No, I haven't —what that speaks to, Senator, is that you're more interested in a political hit 
than in the police actually finding out who did it. You were told by the police they did not want to discuss  this. It's 
just extraordinary.  
Senator McGRATH:   That's actually not what the police said, Senator Wong, with respect. That is actually 
not— 
Senator Wong:   It is, actually. I would refer to the evidence of the police in the home affairs estimates on the 
last occasion.  
Senator McGRATH:   The police did not say — 
Senator Wong:   I was very clear on the last occasion that we believe our national security agencies, including 
the Australian Federal Police working where appropriate with state and territory police forces, should be allowed 
to do their jobs. Their jobs are not benefitted —and are, in fact, potentially hindered —by politicians who seek to 
make political points, as you did.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 25 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator McGRATH:   The AFP evidence was very clear. It did not relate to when the Prime Minister was told. 
Our questions have — 
Senator Wong:   That is a lie. That is not true.  
Senator McGRATH:   We're trying to have a respectful dialogue here. All of our questions went to when the 
Prime Minister was told. None of our questions went to operational matters.  
Senator Wong:   No, Senator; this is the problem. You did not listen to what the AFP said. The commissioner's 
statement at the commencement of the Home Affairs estimates on the last occasion went precisely to the 
distinction you had just sought to make and pointed out why he still did not want to answer those questions —
because it did go potentially to knowing when people knew certain details, including the police. My point to you 
about this is that we should allow the authorities to do their work. You were told that this had the potential to 
compromise operations , and you asked questions anyway, and that says something about the recklessness and the 
risk that the Dutton opposition engages in when it comes to national security.  
Senator McGRATH:   The Prime Minister has been very open on other terrorism incidents around the country 
in terms of saying when he was being briefed by the AFP. Are you saying the Prime Minister is reckless when it 
comes to issues of national security?  
Senator Wong:   No. I'm saying the Prime Minister listens to the advice of security agencies . Mr Dutton and 
his frontbench do not.  
Senator McGRATH:   When the Prime Minister was told about an alleged terrorism incident , and it does not 
go to operational matters, i n particular , when the New South Wales Labor Premier was more than upfront in 
advising when he was told , are you saying that the New South Wales Labor Premier is reckless?  
Senator Wong:   Senator, I refer you to the evidence of the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police and 
other officers  before Home Affairs last estimates in relation to all of those matters.  
Senator McGRATH:   Are you sa ying that the New South Wales Labor Premier was reckless because he 
advised the citizens of New South Wales as to the date he was advised of the alleged terrorism incident?  
 Senator Wong:   What I am s aying is that Mr Dutton  and you and your colleagues have been demonstrably 
willing to not heed the advice of the AFP on multiple occasions, over and over again in question time, over and 
over again in this estimates, and you're still doing so today. That's what I'm saying.  
Senator McGRATH:   The AFP's advice does not go to when the Prime Minister — 
Senator Wong:   You obviously have not read the Hansard . 
Senator McGRATH:   I have read the advice.  
Senator Wong:   I bet you have not read the Hansard.   
Senator McGRATH:   Well, please read out the line where it says — 
Senator CASH:   Read out the line.  
Senator McGRATH:   Read out the line where it says the Prime Minister —the release of the date of when the 
Prime Minister was advised that a terrorism incident should not be made public. Please read that line out.  
Senator Wong:   We went around this on multiple occasions on the last occasion. Since then, the police have 
made public the factual nature, the fact ual basis or  some of the facts of this case. There was a subsequent  
discussion after the estimates  on the last occasion in this portfolio in Home Affairs. I would refer you to that. And 
I have nothing further to add to this. 
Senator McGRATH:   So, notwithstanding the release of certain information by the relevant security agenc ies, 
you're still refusing to say when the Prime Minister was first told?  We just want to know the date.  
Senator Wong:   No, do you know what I'm saying? I'm saying that your recklessness with this issue over and 
over again in the chamber and in estimates, despite what the AFP said, was a new level of willingness to 
compromise national security. And you've continued it for days, and you have been found out. I refer you, 
Senator, to the evidence of the AFP on the last occasion. And, on this, I have nothing further to add.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think you've been found out with respect to the Prime Minister, and so has the Prime 
Minister, that you claim to lead a government of transparency, and yet, when it comes to a very simple question 
as to when the Prime Minister was first told of an alleged security incident, for some reason, and no -one can work 
out why, you refuse to release that date. With respect, the advice from the AFP and the other security agencies 
does not explicitly rule out releasing the date of when the Prime Minister was first told. It is not an operational 
matter.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 26 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Wong:   Senator, that was the line you and Senator Paterson ran at the last estimates and the AFP had 
a clear response to it. All I'm saying is that I think everybody looking at this —you went at it every day until the 
facts came out , and you dropped off it because it wasn't politically convenient . It wasn't politically convenient for 
you to listen to what the Australian Federal Police had to say, and you continued despite that. I think it is an 
example, yet again, of the recklessness  and the risk of a Dutton government. You're not prepared to do the right 
thing when it comes to Australian national security. You always want to play the political game , and you 're doing 
it again.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think your characterisation of the Labor Premier of New South Wales is unfair  and 
perhaps your characterisation of the Prime Minister , when he 's previously released the date s of when he has 
received advice from security agencies. So what is the difference between other incidents and this particular 
incident? Why is the Prime Minister able to release the date in relation to other instances and not in relation to  this 
particular one ?  
Senator Wong:   Unlike you, we listen to the national security agencies. You asked me —and you clearly 
haven't read the statement  from the commissioner, but I'll read you the relevant bit  from  the last estimate s, which 
is what I referred you to :  
Finally, I expect you will want to ask the AFP questions about Operation Kissinger, which is our investigation into a caravan  
found in January in New South Wales, and Operation Hillfield, the investigation into the arson of the Adass Israel synagogue 
in Melbourne last year. I understand there is great interest in these investigations; however, I will not provide updates in 
public forums. Detail provided, whether it seems innocuous or not, can have an impact on investigations, including giving 
suspects an insight into what we knew and when, and what processes triggered expected tasks. We are unapologetic that our 
main priority remains identifying the offenders and bringing them before the courts. The AFP and partners will provide an 
update at an appropriate time.  
But you didn't listen that. I mean, that's what I find— 
Senator McGRATH:   With respect, Minister , that backs up  my case. That totally backs my case up. I'm so 
happy you read that out. Thank you, Senator Wong.  
Senator Wong:   Senator McGrath, c an I finish ? 
Senator McGRATH:   Of course.  
Senator Wong:   You know that you continued to ask questions after that statement was made. What sort of 
responsible politician , when a police officer says that, continues to ask questions? That's what you did.  
Senator McGRATH:   No. The police officer, with respect, did not say — 
Senator Wong:   No, that is  what you did. That is what Senator Cash and Senator Paterson continue to do. 
What sort of responsible political leader , when a police officer says that, continues to ask questions? It is 
unbelievable.  
Senator McGRATH:   The police officer did not refer  to the date of when  the Prime Minister was told.  
Senator Wong:   I think everybody watching this will know i t's because Senator McGrath and Peter Dutton and 
James Paterson and others put political interest above national interest —  
Senator McGRATH:   Are you saying that Chris Minns duffed it?  
Senator Wong:   and above the interests of law enforcement.  
Senator McGRATH:   That's what Chris Minns did.  
Senator Wong:   But why would you not put the interest s of law enforcement first? People can answer that 
question for themselves.  
Senator McGRATH:   Previously, you said during the investigation that you couldn't release the date because 
it was an operational matter. Now that it is no longer an operational matter, why are you still hiding from the 
Australian people when the Prime Minister was first briefed on this?  
Senator Wong:   Senator, I've responded . I'm not responding again. I have responded on this.  
Senator CASH:   No, with all due respect , you haven't responded. That is a very clear question. You said 
during the investigation that you couldn't release the date because it was an operational matter. Now that it is no 
longer an operational matter why are you still hiding from the Australian people when the Prime Minister was 
first briefed on this?  
Senator Wong:   Well, I refer to the AFP's evidence on the last occasion.  
Senator CASH:   We're not on the last occasion ; we're here today.  
Senator Wong:   Well, I refer to the AFP evidence.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 27 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That's from a previous time.  
Senator Wong:   Sure.  
Senator CASH:   Events have occurred since then. Statements have been made. Why are you unable to now 
tell the committee and the Australian people when the Prime Minister was first briefed?  
Senator Wong:   I refer you to previous evidence.  
Senator CASH:   So we're going to an election, and the Australian people are not going to be made aware of 
when the Prime Minister was first briefed in relation to this incident?  
Senator Wong:   The Prime Minister has answered questions in question time about this, Senator , so I'd refer 
you to those answers. But what I would say is this : we are going to an election, and the Australian people can see  
(1) the Prime Minister who takes the advice of agencies  and who, frankly, weathered your political attack because 
he knew  it was the right thing to do ; and (2) you, Mr Dutton, Senator McGrath, Senator Paterson, who put politics 
ahead of law enforcement. That is what the Australian people can see.   
CHAIR:   I need to rotate the call now, colleagues. Senator Sheldon.  
Senator SHELDON:   I just want to ask some questions regarding  cabinet and managing conflicts of interest.  
This is regarding  a cabinet minister. I will start with the Cabinet Handbook . I have the Cabinet Handbook  15th 
edition with me. Could you just confirm that  a minister must declare any matter that may give rise to a real or 
perceived conflict of interest.  
Ms Sullivan :  Yes, that's correct.  
Senator SHELDON:   Is that paragraph 85?  
Ms Sullivan :  Yes, it is.  
Senator SHELDON:   It also says that ministers must declare these in meetings at cabinet where matters are 
under discussion that could give rise to a conflict of interest. That's paragraph 86, is that correct?  
Ms Sullivan :  That is correct.  
Senator SHELDON:   It also says that ministers are required to adopt a broad interpretation of pecuniary and 
non-pecuniary interests, including the interests of family members.  
Ms Sullivan :  That is correct, yes, as per paragraph 87.  
Senator SHELDON:   On the question of pecuniary interest s, does that mean financial  gain or loss ? Is that 
correct?  
Ms Sullivan :  As set out in paragraph s 85 to 88, there is a reference to the Code of Conduct for Ministers and 
being  in line with that. It's also set out in paragraph 87 —pecuniary and non -pecuniary interests, interests of family 
members and all interests of their own when considering a matter . Then there is further detail within the Code of 
Conduct for Ministers around specific issues as well, such as directorships and so forth.  
Senator SHELDON:   And that would go to questions of, as I understand it, automatically absenting 
themselves from a meeting and how that might be dealt with.  
Ms Sullivan :  Certainly, under this edition of the Cabinet Handbook , there's no requirement to automatically 
absent themselves. It's up to the chair of the cabinet or cabinet committee to decide — 
Senator SHELDON:   That's right.  
Ms Sullivan :  in consultation with the Cabinet Secretary whether to excuse the minister when that issue is 
under consideration.  
Senator SHELDON:   And they should explicitly agree to that , whether that happens or not . Is that correct?  
Ms Sullivan :  Under the terms of the Cabinet Handbook , yes, that is correct.  
Senator SHELDON:   Have t hese guidelines been broadly consistent for the past decade or so ? 
Ms Sullivan :  To the best of my knowledge, yes. The only reason I put that caveat on it is I've only been in the 
job for two months, but, yes, I think it would be safe to say that it has been broadly consistent throughout the 
various editions of the handbook.  
Senator SHELDON:   And those declaration s, of course, include family members as well?  
Ms Sullivan :  To the best of my knowledge, yes. I'm happy to take that on notice and confirm that by looking 
through previous editions.  
Senator SHELDON:   Just so I understand it, the guidelines say : 
… it will not normally be necessary to repeat that declaration in subsequent Cabinet discussions — Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 28 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  unless — 
… a significant time has elapsed since a declaration and the interest is one that might not be well known to colleagues …  
So, as I understand , it's been there for some considerable time.  
Ms Sullivan :  Yes, that's correct.  
Senator SHELDON:   Probably my point is about declarations prior to this government being in existence . 
Ms Sullivan :  To the best of my knowledge, yes.  
Senator SHELDON:   Under the former Abbott, Turnbull and Morrison governments, the ministerial code of 
conduct did not restrict ministers from o wning shares or having financial interests in private or public companies. 
Is that correct?  
Ms Sullivan :  I would need to take that on notice.  
Senator SHELDON:   Is there someone else , Mr Hehir, who can answer that?  
Mr Hehir :  I'm just looking at the 14th edition now , so I'll just check.  
Mr Walter :  If I recall correctly —I don't have it in front of me —the Statement of Ministerial Standards , which 
was the document used by the former government, did allow for shareholdings in certain circumstances, but you 
did need to declare them under the process set out in the standards.  But I don't have the standards in front of me, 
so that's from memory.  
Senator SHELDON:   I won't  go to specifics , and  if I do I'll ask you to take it on notice.  
Mr Walter :  The only significant change, if I recall correctly —well, no. Let me rephrase. The current Code of 
Conduct for Ministers  and the Statement of Ministerial Standards cover fairly similar ground, but there are some 
differences. One of the big differences is the use of blind trusts. The current government prohibited the use of 
blind trusts, which was, if I recall correctly, allowed under the ministerial standards.  
Senator SHELDON:   But in the broad —sorry. I didn't want to cut you off.  
Mr Walter :  That's alright.  
Senator SHELDON:   So the ministers ' code of conduct did not restrict ministers from owning shares or 
having financial interests in private or public companies, in its broadest context?  
Mr Walter :  That's right. It had some management provisions in it, including declarations and so forth. Of 
course, the Cabinet Handbook  is the same, if I recall correctly. Again, I don't have that in front of me.  
Senator SHELDON:   So that I'm clear in my head, ministers could have a personal financial interest in a 
particular business, for example, or own shares  in a public company ? 
Mr Walter :  I'm sorry, Senator . I'd really have to go and look at the standards again to confirm that. It's been a 
while since —we don't look at them, because the code of conduct is the current instrument.  
Senator Wong:   So you're asking questions about the previous code of conduct.  
Senator SHELDON:   That's right.  
Senator Wong:   Well, there was quite a lot of focus by the Prime Minister in changing and elevating the 
obligations on ministers. Perhaps we can come back to this when Mr Walter has had a chance to look at the 
previous , because I think the point of the improvement in the standards is an important one.  
Senator McGRATH:   Isn't it budget estimates?  
Senator SHELDON:   It certainly is.  
Senator Wong:   Says the man who 's not really been on budget estimates at all for most of the morning.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think national security — 
Senator CASH:   National security is budget estimates.  
Senator SHELDON:   We don't have any  obligations — 
Senator Wong:   All your refusing to listen to national security agencies — 
Senator CASH:   How is anti semitism not budget estimates?  
Senator McGRATH:   I do listen to national security agencies. This is — 
Senator CASH:   Bizarre.  
Senator McGRATH:   intriguing.  I think we all know where this is going.  
Senator CASH:   Correct.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 29 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator SHELDON:   What I've got so far, if I understand the evidence so far correctly, is that owning shares 
or having a financial interest in a private  or public compan y is something that would be declared . Presumably 
there 's an obligation to disclose.  
Mr Walter :  Sorry, Senator . Could you repeat the question.  
Senator SHELDON:   Presumably there's an obligation to disclose.  
Mr Walter :  Under the former standards?  
Senator SHELDON:   Yes. 
Mr Walter :  Yes. 
Senator SHELDON:   So there was an obligation to disclose . There's been quite a bit of media coverage of this 
over a period of time . I want to clarify a few things here and also go to some of that coverage that has been raised 
already , particularly regarding whether Mr Dutton — 
Senator McGRATH:   There's the  money  question . Here we go!  
Senator SHELDON:   had recused himself from cabinet meetings.  
Senator CASH:   Clap, clap, everybody. It's not like budget estimates. It's not about 70c a day.  
Senator SHELDON:   This is about the expenditure of public mone ys— 
Senator McGRATH:   No, it's about — 
Senator CASH:   Seriously!  
Senator SHELDON:   and profiteering from the expenditure of public mone ys. 
Senator McGRATH:   Here we go!  
Senator CASH:   And you 're using parliamentary privilege  to do it. Nice!  
CHAIR:   Senators!  
Senator SHELDON:   This is an opportunity, quite clearly, to ask some critical questions — 
Senator CASH:   Talk about consumer pain as well then.  
Senator SHELDON:   and find  out what the answers are.  During the Abbott government , there  were many 
cabinet deliberations on childcare matters, but it also focused on three particular areas . There were deliberations 
on the 2015 -16 budget, where a new childcare package was announced with an additional $4.4 billion in funding.  
Senator McGRATH:   It all went to Peter Dutton, everybody. It all went to Peter Dutton.  
Senator SHELDON:   There were deliberations or updates on the Productivity Commission 's draft report in 
2014 and  final report in 2015 . It was a report into child care , and c hild care was discussed in cabinet . There was 
deliberation in 2013 when the Abbott government commissioned the Productivity Commission inquiry into child  
care. I want to be clear. Were the  updates to the Productivity Commission's draft report in 2014 and final report in 
2015  discussed in cabinet?  
Senator CASH:   Ten years ago . Eleven years ago. Shall we talk about employment services and the former 
prime minister , Mr Rudd?  
Senator SHELDON:   I know you want to shut down these questions. The y're legitimate questions to ask.  
Senator McGRATH:   This is budget estimates, and you're throwing mud at Peter Dutton.  
Senator SHELDON:   We're yet to receive the answers.  
Senator McGRATH:   You don't want to talk about the  budget.  
Senator SHELDON:   You can make conclusions after that.  
Senator Wong:   You haven't asked a question about the budget.  
Senator McGRATH:   I've asked lots of questions about the budget.  
Senator CASH:   National security is directly related to the budget.  
Senator Wong:   You haven't asked a question specifically about the budget.  
CHAIR:   Order, senators! The witness needs to be able to — 
Senator McGRATH:   Throwing mud at Peter Dutton — 
Senator Wong:   Just to  be clear : the coalition  are having a go at Senator Sheldon asking legitimate 
questions — 
Senator CASH:   From 11 years ago —seriously ! Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 30 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Wong:   which go  to a conflict of  interest and  how th at was  dealt with, and saying we should be  asking 
questions about the budget. As far as I can see : has there been a single cost -of-living or budget question from the 
opposition  today?  I don't think so.  
Senator SHELDON:   There hasn't been, but also — 
Senator McGRATH:   Throwing mud at Peter Dutton — 
CHAIR:   Senators, y ou all know that these questions are in order. You 've made your  political point. If our 
witnesses are ready to answer the question , that would be terrific.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm sure they've got an answer ready to go!  
Mr Walter :  Perhaps I can just clarify : I've had a brief look at the ministerial standard s under the former 
government.  In essence they say you can hold shares but not in areas where that would rise to a conflict of 
interest. They make it clear that you can retain diversified investments, superannuation funds and so forth.  The 
rule in the code of conduct is a little stricter —that you need to divest yourself of shareholdings —but you can hold 
diversified funds in superannuation, but you need to pay close  attention to make sure no conflicts arise.  
Senator SHELDON:   The essence of it is  that you would declare that you have potential conflicts of interest.  
Mr Walter :  Yes, of course.  
Senator SHELDON:   It goes to the  question of whether there are actual conflicts of interest,  which is a 
question I' ll go to. Are you aware of whether Mr Dutton recused himself from cabinet discussions on the 2015 -16 
budget ? There were announcements of $4.4 billion in funding, deliberations regarding the Productivity 
Commission report in 2014 -15 in regard to child  care—that was discussed —and deliberations  in 2013 when the 
Abbott government commissioned the Productivity Commission inquiry into child  care. Are you aware whether  
he excu sed himself from th ese discussions?  
Senator CASH:   Chair, can I raise a point of order.  
CHAIR:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   How are these questions in order? They are questions from a Labor s enator in 2025 to a 
Labor minister in 2025 about the conduct of ministers in a former government. How is that relevant to this 
government's budget estimates?  
CHAIR:   It is. I have not called any questions out of order.  
Senator CASH:   We're going to have a free -for-all from here , then!  
CHAIR:   No, I have not called any questions thus far out of order.  
Senator McGRATH:   What do you mean 't hus far '—since you have been chair or just this morning?  
Senator Wong:   Can you stop being r ude to the chair? It's really not appropriate. Why are you so disrespectful 
to her ? 
Senator McGRATH:   I'm not being disrespectful. You're  the one engag ing in mud-throwing  at the Leader of 
the Opposition. This is a  complete  abuse of the process . 
Senator Wong:   You are disrespectful. Don't bluster and yell.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm not blustering and yelling. This is an abuse of the process.  
Senator Wong:   You are consistently disrespectful to Senator Pratt . 
Senator McGRATH:   No, I'm not.  
Senator Wong:   Yes, you are.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm not disrespectful. I want to make sure we 've got Senat e estimates being  run 
appropriately here.  
CHAIR:   Senator Sheldon has a point of order.  
Senator SHELDON:   All of us here have a series of robust questions. I recall  the questions that Senator 
Roberts asked about matters in 2017  and, a lso, that  Senator Shoebridge asked over a long period of time , as well 
as the opposition . These are critical questions that go to budget implications over a period of time , and, in the 
same spirit  those other questions were asked, I'm asking these questions. If people want to not deal with possible 
questions of personal financial interest s or share arrangements and what existed before and what exists now —I'm 
not drawing any conclusions  as yet ; I'm waiting to hear the answers. If you do n't want to hear  the answers to those 
questions , then  keep trying to shut me down.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 31 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   My understanding of the standing orders, which I am v ery on top of , would indicate that these 
questions are perfectly in order.  
Senator CASH:   Chair, with all due respect, privilege re solution 1(9) requires  that a discussion o f a ruling of 
the chair  on the relevance of question s shall occur in a private session. I therefore ask that we dissolve into  a 
private session.  
Senator Wong:   Obviously that 's a matter of the committee . If Senator Cash wishes to seek a private meeting  
to try and shut this down , she is entitled to seek to do that . But I would just make this point — 
Senator CASH:   No, Senator Wong, I'd like to adhere to standing orders, which you usually always go by.  
Senator Wong:   I would have thought that questions —if I may, for the committee's consideration —about the 
ministerial code would not be out of order in this committee historically, but obviously the committee will make 
its considerations and take advice.  
CHAIR:   Thank you, Senator Wong. We will suspend.  
Proceedings suspended from 11:25 to 11:37  
CHAIR:   I give the call to the coalition.  
Senator CASH:   If I just could move to a different topic, given the time for today. Minister, is the Prime 
Minister still committed to Voice. Treaty. Truth?  
Mr Hehir :  Sorry, I missed the question.  
Senator CASH:   I was asking the minister —on behalf of the Prime Minister. Minister, is the Prime Minister 
still committed to Voice. Treaty. Truth?  
Mr Hehir :  My recollection is that the Prime Minister's made some public statements around the Voice and 
treaty. I might ask Mr Exell if he could — 
Senator CASH:   I'm actually asking as a matter of government policy, with all due respect, Secretary. Thank 
you. Minister, the question was for you on behalf of the Prime Minister.  
Senator Wong:   I'm asking Mr Exell to respond.  
Senator CASH:   Do you not have an answer on behalf of the Prime Minister as to whether or not  your 
government is committed to Voice. Treaty. Truth?  
Senator Wong:   I'm asking the official to respond.  
Senator CASH:   But you're the minister, sitting her on behalf of the Prime Minister.  
Senator Wong:   Senator, I'm the minister , and I can direct the question where I see fit. I'm asking Mr Exell to 
respond.  
Senator McGRATH:   So the Prime Minister doesn't have a view. Is it a secret?  
Senator CASH:   It's usually the other way around —but anyway.  
Mr Exell :  I'll ask Ms Doherty to respond.  
Ms Doherty :  The government remains committed to the principles of the Uluru statement and continues to 
engage in good faith with leaders and communities around next steps.  Government acknowledges there's 
considerable work underway , at state and territory level, on treaty and truth -telling processes and the government 
welcomes this work.  
Senator CASH:   The government does remain committed to the principles of Voice. Treaty. Truth. What did 
you say in relation the work that continues to be underway?  
Senator Wong:   Well, I — 
Senator CASH:   No, Minister. I'm more t han happy now to hear from the official, seeing as you deferred to 
the officials.  
Senator Wong:   Senator, can we just take the temperature down, please?  
Senator CASH:   Absolutely.  
Senator Wong:   Thank you.  
Senator CASH:   The official was actually just about to answer my question; that was all.  
Senator Wong:   You don't need to jump in every minute. I'm just quibbling with or pushing back on your 
summary of what the official said.  
Senator CASH:   Well, that's what the official said.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 32 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Wong:   Ms Doherty , I think, outlined the government's position. You chose to summarise it in the 
way you wish , but the government's position was as outlined by Ms Doherty. Please proceed with your questions.  
Ms Doherty :  Senator, I was referring to work under way at  state and territory levels, particularly in relation to 
treaty and truth -telling.  
Senator CASH:   Minister, i s it the policy of the government to pursue a treaty at this point in time  or in the 
next parliament ? 
Senator Wong:   Senator, can I just say, unless the committee's changed the program, these would normally be 
questions in cross -portfolio. I'm not here with officials —I appreciate Ms Doherty obviously assisted , but these are 
not questions that would usually be  dealt with at this point in the program. The committee may have changed the 
schedule , but I wasn't aware of that.  
Senator McGRATH:   Well, t hat's why the first question went to you , with respect . 
Senator CASH:   It was to you, as representing the Prime Minister.  
Senator Wong:   Chair,  I'm asking you to — 
Senator CASH:   This is a matter for  the Prime Minister.  
Senator Wong:   I know that you want to get everything done today. You chose the estimates program . This 
estimates program was at the opposition's request —Senator Birmingham's request. My recollection is that 
Indigenous matters are dealt with in cross -portfolio. I can't recall: is  that tomorrow night or tomorrow afternoon?  
I'm so sorry.  
Senator STEWART:   Next Friday.  
Senator Wong:   Next Friday —thank you. So  I'd refer you to that, Senator.  
Senator CASH:   With all due respect, Minister , this is in relation to government policy. You are sitting here as 
the Minister representing the Prime Minister. So I'm a little confused as to why you cannot answer these 
questions . Either you're  aware of government policy or you are not . 
Senator Wong:   Senator, I'm  pretty good at being across a lot of government policy, I think — 
Senator CASH:   So you'd be aware — 
Senator Wong:   but not everything . And what I'd say to you is that these would be questions that would 
usually be dealt with in the Indigenous affairs cross -portfolio  day, so I'd refer you to that.  
Senator CASH:   This is Prime Minister and Cabinet . 
Senator Wong:   Yes, and t he Indigenous affairs  and issues , under the programs that you have agree d, are 
held—I don't think you've ever attended , Senator — 
Senator CASH:   This is a matter of government policy.  
Senator Wong:   Oh, boy! Senator, can I just finish? You and I both had a late night. Can we just try and get 
through today in a reasonably respectful way.  
Senator McGRATH:   We're perky.  
Senator CASH:   I'm very perky.  
Senator Wong:   I'm so sorry ? 
Senator McGRATH:   We're perky.  
Senator Wong:   Well, y ou might be perky . I'm quite tired , actually, but  that's because we got a lot of 
legislation through. I guess. y ou only had to vote no to everything, including tax cuts.  
Senator CASH:   Seventy cents.  
Senator McGRATH:   Seventy cents.  
Senator Wong:   But, anyway , what I would say is — 
Senator CASH:   Seventy cents.  
Senator Wong:   We're still going, are we?  
Senator CASH:   Is that more than $5?  
Senator Wong:   Would you like  to give a speech , or can I respond? Senator, t hese are matters for cross -
portfolio Indigenous affairs. That is a day where we deal with Indigenous issues across government —so not just 
one portfolio, one minister, but across government. That has been established for some time . That arrangement in 
the program was established on a cross -party basis  some time ago . So I would refer you and these questions to Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 33 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  those estimate hearings . I thought there were some tomorrow, but Senator St ewart, who would know better than I, 
says it's  next Friday, which is the program you agreed to.  
CHAIR:   And I note that t he coalition would have had the opportunity to call those agencies today had they 
sought to.  
Senator CASH:   Can I just confirm, then, Chair, we are in outcome 1? Is that correct?  
Senator Wong:   I refer to my previous answer, Chair . 
Senator CASH:   Are we in outcome 1?  
Senator Wong:   I know the senator has come along and she wants to do particular things —certainly no cost of 
living. But the issues that she's  covered this morning — 
Senator CASH:   You wasted $450 million on a refe rendum . That goes directly to cost of living.  
Senator Wong:   Senator, here we go again.  
Senator McGRATH:   You didn't even talk about cost of living until after the referendum was lost.  
Senator CASH:   Chair, could I just go back to this: a re we in outcome 1? 
Senator Wong:   That's the best you can do.  
Senator CASH:   Are we in outcome 1, Provide high quality policy advice and support to the Prime Minister, 
the cabinet, portfolio ministers and parliamentary secretaries including through the coordination of government 
activities, policy development and program delivery ? How is a question about whether or not the government's 
policy is that they are still committed to voice, treaty, truth not relevant in this  outcome?  
Mr Hehir :  If I may, the outcome is quite broad , as the senator has read it out. 
Senator CASH:   Correct.  
Mr Hehir :  However, it has been our practice to allow the portfolio agencies with the detail o n the subject 
matter to provide the detailed answers to questions. The officials have provided the high -level statement, as Ms 
Doherty provided. Beyond that I think it 's appropriate that this be referred to the appropriate hearing.  
Senator CASH:   With all due respect , Secretary, we're not asking for detail. We 're merely asking for a yes or 
no answer. Is this government committed to Voice, Treaty, Truth? That 's it. There's no detail there; just a yes or 
no answer.  
CHAIR:   Senator Cash, you can't define the answer for the witness.  
Senator CASH:   Just a yes or no.  
Mr Hehir :  The official has provided the statement where —I don't want to verbal the witness —the principles 
that underpin  it continue to be supported and notes the work that 's being undertaken at a state and territory level . I 
think that 's the government 's position.  
Senator CASH:   So that I'm not verballing anybody : the government is committed to the principles of Voice, 
Treaty, Truth?  
Mr Hehir :  Sorry, it's committed to the principles that underpin the Uluru statement — 
Senator CASH:   Which are?  
Mr Hehir :  and will continue to engage in good faith with leaders and communities to decide on the next steps  
at the national level. It's an ongoing engagement.  
Senator CASH:   Right . So when you say 'the principles ', what are the principles?  
Senator Wong:   Senator, I'm referring this to the Friday hearing which has the officials who are dealing with 
this matter. I know — 
Senator CASH:   This is the secretary of the department.  
Senator Wong:   you're desperate to talk this up . We all know why. But the officials who can talk you through 
that and who are responsible for that are appearing on Friday.  
Senator CASH:   Again, Minister, with all due respect this is not a detail s question. It is a simple question : is 
the government's policy position that you are committed to Voice, Treaty, Truth? It 's a simple yes or no answer. 
I'm not asking for the details ; I'm merely — 
Senator Wong:   I know you are well -known for only living in a binary universe. That is how you operate and 
how you think. It is not — 
Senator CASH:   How is the government committed to Voice, Treaty, Truth not a binary question?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 34 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Wong:   I know you like yes /no answers because that is how you operate. Ms Doherty and Mr Hehir 
have outlined the government's position. I refer you to their answers and I would ask you to do what others have 
done , which is to recognise that those issues  are dealt with in the cross -portfolio estimates , which you have agreed 
to. 
Senator McGRATH:   Is the Prime Minister still committed to a treaty?  
CHAIR:   Senators! Senator Cash and Senator McGrath, witnesses here have an obligation to be truthful about 
what 's within their knowledge . That clearly means that they have the ability to make sure that the right person is 
answering the question when it 's not within their expertise  or knowledge . You both understand that.  
Senator CASH:   And that is why you direct questions to the relevant minister  at the table. This is the minister, 
I understand, representing the Prime Minister. It  is a simple policy question —nothing more and nothing less —as 
articulated with in outcome 1. Minister Wong, are you and the Prime Minister and the Albanese government still 
committed to treaty?  
Senator Wong:   Senator, I know what you 're trying to do.  
Senator CASH:   It's a yes or no answer, Minister.  
Senator Wong:   Senator, you always want to make things into a grab.  
Senator McGRATH:   We just want an answer.  
Senator Wong:   No, you always — 
Senator CASH:   It's a very simple question.  
Senator Wong:   Can I answer?  
Senator CASH:   If the answer 's no then say no. That doesn't give me anything  then, does it? It's no. There you 
go—no. 
Senator Wong:   There 's no point in talking . They just interrupt me , so I'm just  not going to say anything  for a 
while . 
Senator McGRATH:   Minister Wong, are you and the Prime Minister still committed to a treaty?  
Senator Wong:   Senator , I know that you want to reduce everything to a grab, including — 
Senator Cash interjecting — 
Senator Wong:   Are you finished, Senator? You want to reduce everything to a grab and everything to a 
political conflict. This is a complex area . This is an area where there has been great difference s of view in the 
community but also a great need for progress.  It requires goodwill , trust, dialogue and respect , little of which has 
been demonstrated today by you in this area. Ms Doherty and Mr He hir have outlined the position. Yes, it is not 
the grab that you want , but it is the position the government has articulated , so I refer you to their answer . You 
can join others on Friday for the cross -portfolio estimates where these issues have been and can be canvassed in 
detail.  
Senator McGRATH:   Is the Prime Minister committed to a treaty?  
Senator Wong:   I refer you to my previous answer , Senator McGrath.  
Senator McGRATH:   Is the Prime Minister not committed to a treaty?  
Senator Wong:   Chair, if I may, this is the same question over and over again. I have now answered it , and 
I've done so respectfully , on numerous occasions. I 'd ask you to deal with this, because the repetition of the same 
question  over and over again is not a good use of the committee's time. I 'm very happy to talk about other matters.  
Senator CASH:   Well, w e get to choose how to use our time.  
Senator Wong:   I notice that  there  still has not been  one cost -of-living question asked by the opposition —not 
one. 
Senator McGRATH:   Is the Prime Minister r uling out a treaty?  
Senator Wong:   See? Still not a cost -of-living question.  
Senator McGRATH:   Senator Wong, on behalf of the Prime Minister, will you rule out a treaty?  
Senator Wong:   They want to have a cultur e argument; they don't want to have a cost -of-living discussion.  
Senator McGRATH:   Senator Wong, on behalf of the Prime Minister, will you rule out a treaty?  
Senator Wong:   I refer to my previous answer.  
CHAIR:   Senator McGrath — Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 35 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   This goes to the heart of the cost of living.  
CHAIR:   The minister at the table has answered the question.  
Senator McGRATH:   Has she ? 
CHAIR:   I'm not going to call on her to answer the same question over and over again. If you want to talk 
about just this issue and use all your time up doing that, then you may, but perhaps it might be a better use of your 
time to move on to other topics.  
Senator CASH:   I have to say, on behalf of the Australian people — 
Senator Wong:   You don't speak for the Australian people. Don't be so arrogant.  
Senator CASH:   I'm asking the question. You like people to respect you.  
Senator McGRATH:   You are so rude, Penny.  
Senator Wong:   Well, d on't start, 'On behalf of the Australian people'. Not everyone in Australia agrees with 
Michaelia Cash, on many issues, including on this . 
Senator CASH:   On behalf of the Australian people, I say you wasted a billion dollars on your divisive 
referendum.  
CHAIR:   Order, Senators!  
Senator McGRATH:   How much are you going to waste on a treaty?  
CHAIR:   That includes you, Senator McGrath . 
Senator McGRATH:   Rule out the treaty.  
Senator CASH:   They can't rule out the treaty , because they're pursuing it.  
CHAIR:   Senators, you  can keep asking the same question over and over again, by all means, but I won't call 
on the minister to have to answer it , because the answer is the same every time. Would the coalition still like the 
call? I can return it to Senator Sheldon  
Senator Wong:   Or Senator Stewart . 
CHAIR:   Or Senator Stewart.  
Senator CASH:   We've got questions, thank you.  
Senator McGRATH:   In this term of parliament, this government, amongst other things, has reversed 
Australia's position on the capital of Israel, contradict ing the position that  the Israelis themselves take ; you have 
reversed Australia's longstanding position in the UN  on numerous votes  and undermined Australia's decades -long, 
and previously bipartisan , position in support of a negotiated two -state solution ; you've backed a resolution 
calling for a state of Palestine to become a member of the UN ; you've adopted a policy of referring to the West 
Bank and Gaza as Occupied Palestinian Territories ; you've failed to meaningfully address anti semitic protests and 
activities in our cities and our university campuses ; you've failed to condemn the evil of anti semitism without also 
referring to other forms of racism, despite anti semitism being the most prolific form of hatred in our country ; you 
resisted the call of your own anti semitism envoy to convene a National Cabinet on anti semitism ; despicabl y, 
you've delayed criminal laws to combat doxxing and  then made them contingent on the passage of unannounced 
and unrelated privacy laws which were supported by your political donors but opposed by doctors,  business 
groups  and media outlets  ranging from News Corp  to the Guardian , effectively holding support for the Jewish 
community hostage ; and, w orst of all, you've allowed a situation to develop where Jewish businesses are 
vandalised , cars and businesses are torched, a synagogue is firebombed  and Jewish people are targeted. How can 
Jewish Australians have faith in your government?  
Senator Wong:   Well, some of that is a policy question for tomorrow, but I would say more broadly in relation 
to those policy questions that it is in line with the overwhelming majority of the international community, 
including friends and partners. The second point I'd make is that you were critical of the Australian government 
calling for a ceasefire even when the United Kingdom, Canada, New Zealand, Japan and Korea were all calling 
for ceasefire and you continue to be critical of a ceasefire that President Trump sought, so I think people can 
understand where your position is. In terms of the foreign policy point, I'm very happy to deal with those matters 
tomorrow. You made a number of assertions in there about antisemitism which were a lie. That's not true, and I 
know you want to do it for political reasons, but it's not true.  
Senator McGRATH:   Which ones were a lie?  
Senator Wong:   To say we never condemned antisemitism — Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 36 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator McGRATH:   I didn't actually say  that. I said 'failed to condemn the evil of antisemitism without also 
referring to other forms of racism, despite antisemitism being the most prolific form of hatred in our country '. 
That's what I  put to you.  
Senator Wong:   The Lakemba event on 9 October —the Prime Minister condemned  those , as did I. The Prime 
Minister, as did I, condemned what was said and the signs, from memory, at the Opera House rally. I'm trying to 
recall if that was about signs as well as what was said. And the Prime Minister expressed concern over rising 
antisemitism on 9 October 2023, visited a synagogue on 11 October 2023  and condemned  planned protests in 
October 2024. You've continued to peddle  a false narrative that there was no condemnation of the things that were 
said and done at the Opera House , and that is not true.  
Senator McGRATH:   I didn't mention the Opera House.  
Senator Wong:   I would also make this point . The criticism is  that we would reference other forms of hate as 
well as antisemitism. Antisemitism is real. So too are other forms of prejudice , and I have never believed that 
saying one is  against people being vilified because they are Muslim diminishes the stance one takes against 
antisemitism. And I think to suggest that it does is wrong.  
I have seen more antisemitism over these last years than I've  ever seen in Australia before , and that deeply 
grieves me , because  this goes to who we are as a country. I have said repeatedly, as has the Prime Minister, that 
this antisemitism is an attack not only on the Australian Jewish community but on who we are as Australians, 
because we are the most diverse country in the world. One in two of us either was born overseas or has a parent 
born overseas . We have an ethos of inclusion and respect and peaceful disagreement, and we must hold onto that. 
We must fight for that. Part of doing that is, in our language, accepting that our differences of views on a foreign 
policy issue does not mean we should be separated or we should be divided as Australians. We should have the 
capacity to disagree. We should have the capacity to disagree without condemning each other and certainly 
without vilifying each other.  
I would again say to you, Senator, I do not understand  why, just as you did not take the advice of the Australian 
Federal Police , you do not listen to Director -General Burgess , who heads up ASIO, when he said turn the 
temperature down . Politicians have  to turn the temperature down on this issue. I will always stand up against all 
forms of prejudice.  I will stand against antisemitism just as I stand against Islamophobia  and just as I stood 
against anti -Asian sentiment, as I have all my life, and the Labor Party will too.  Please stop trying to play politics 
with this issue.  
Senator McGRATH:   What message does it send to Jewish Australians that you're refusing to rule out 
arresting the Prime Minister of Israel, who is Jewish?  
Senator Wong:   I refer to my previous answers on this. You are the only one that is trying to talk about this. I 
have said that  it is a hypothetical issue and an issue for the Attorney -General — 
Senator McGRATH:   It's not a hypothetical issue.  
Senator Wong:   You don't listen to Mike Burgess, do you? He says , 'Turn the temperature down,' and you 
consistently turn the temperature up. How is our society and our country made stronger by trying to bring this 
division and conflict here? How is it, Senator? I just do not understand it.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm asking a very simple question — 
Senator Wong:   Maybe it is because I have a migrant heritage and I have seen over many years politicians —
often from your side of politics —who have been happy to try and divide the country. I think we are stronger when 
we bring people together. We are stronger when we recognise that there is difference and we deal with it 
respectfully. We are stronger when we include all and we are stronger when we stand together against hate. I've 
talked about this in the chamber. When Fraser Anning gave his first speech —horrible , both antisemitic and 
Islamophobic ; it talked about  a 'final solution'  and other abhorrent things —I said to Matthias Cormann : 'We 
should move a motion together condemning him and censuring him. We should do it together because the parties 
of government should always stand together against hate and prejudice.' I'm prepared to do that. Why do you want 
to cause division?  
Senator McGRATH:   With respect, it goes to the situation , which  developed in this country because of the 
weak leadership of the Prime Minister, that Jewish Australians felt fundamentally unsafe because of a lack of 
leadership by your government that you are a senior member of. The situation —where Jewish businesses are 
vandalised, where cars and businesses are firebombed and where a synagogue is firebombed —is that Jewish 
people are being targeted. This is not about raising the temperature ; it is about standing up for Jewish Australians 
who feel unsafe because of the weak leadership of your government, and it is not— Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 37 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Wong:   I know it's — 
Senator McGRATH:   Please don't interrupt. It is not helped when you refuse to rule out arresting the Prime 
Minister, the only  Jewish prime minister — 
Senator CASH:   In the world.  
Senator McGRATH:   in the world , a democratically elected Jewish prime minister. You want to talk about 
lowering the temperature? Please, say now: 'Benjamin Netanyahu, come to Australia. You'll be safe here. We will 
welcome you here.' Don't hide behind a word salad. Please, please put out that mat of welcome to the Jewish 
Prime Minister , Benjamin Netanyahu — 
Senator Wong:   Can I say to you: I know you are desperate to try and politicise these issues, and anyone 
watching this today and watching your behaviour over these last months would know that. I would first say : 
Jewish Australians have a right to be safe and to feel safe —full stop. The rise in antisemitism and the threats and 
actual violence in this country are unacceptable, and we stand against them, which is why we've established an 
AFP special operation  and why we banned the Nazi salute and hate symbols . It's why we appointed Ms Segal as 
the first Special Envoy to Combat Antisemitism ; it's why we criminalised doxxing, which you voted against ; it's 
why we're working with states and territories on a database to track hate crimes; it's why we've committed more 
money for Jewish sites across the country, including schools and synagogues; it's why we've strengthened hate 
speech laws; it's why we are also moving to upgrade the museum, the Holocaust Education Centre  and the 
Holocaust Institute of Western Australia ; and it's why we have provided  funding to restore the Adass Israel 
Synagogue.  
I just want to remind you of something that was said in the Senate:  
People will say hurtful and bigoted and stupid … things. People will make racist and sexist and homophobic comments. 
Those views are wrong, but the right to express them is not. If you believe in democracy, you cannot cleanse it of the views 
you disagree with  … The best way to deal with those with whom you disagree is not to force them into the … shadows but to 
let the sun shine, to let the disinfectant of light and public scrutiny judge those offensive views.  
This was you, Senator, in your first speech.  In your first speech, you defended the right  of people to make racist 
comments . 
Senator McGRATH:   Don't do that , Senator Wong —with respect. How dare you do that ! 
Senator Wong:   Don't come in here and say that people should stand up against racism — 
Senator McGRATH:   I will defend freedom of speech. With respect , Senator Wong, you are lowering the 
tone— 
Senator Wong:   You defended the right of people to be racist.  
Senator McGRATH:   because your Prime Minister is so weak.  
CHAIR:   Order!  
Senator McGRATH:   In this country, we have an antisemitic crisis — 
CHAIR:   Order! Senator McGrath, you — 
Senator McGRATH:   because of the weak leadership of you and your Prime Minister. Jewish Australians do 
not feel safe . 
CHAIR:   Senator McGrath, stop shouting.  
Senator McGRATH:   Synagogues are being bombed under this  Prime Minister — 
CHAIR:   We suspend!  
Proceedings suspended from 12:05 to 12:16  
CHAIR:   We're going to resume with a new line of questioning but before we do so, I can announce that IPEA 
will be released this evening —just f or today , not f or next week —and we are waiting to find out in relation to 
WGEA as well. Senator Pocock.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I have a couple of questions in relation  to spending on the Australian 
Government Consulting  body. Minister, this might be a question for you  to begin with . The introduction of the 
Australian government in -house consulting unit was an important step in bringing core Public Service business 
back into the APS. I note that the original budget allocation was $10.9 million for AGC in the 2023 -24 budget . I 
hope I have that correct. The details in the current budget, however, are not for publication, and I would like to 
know why they 're not for publication and seek some transparency on that spending. Minister, why would you not 
tell us what the number is for that facility ? Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 38 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Wong:   Can you take me to BP 2 where you're — 
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I'm sorry ; I don't have my budget papers.  
Mr Hehir :  I might be able to assist . These are all — 
Senator Wong:   Oh, this is the additional resourcing.  
Mr Hehir :  Yes. There's a range of measures included in that  and I think the not -for-publication language 
that's been used is for commercial reasons. The problem is, because they all get totalled up at some point, if we 
identify the individual items you get to work out the one that's commercial in confidence, so they are therefore 
grouped.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   So, having published the figure of $10.9 million for AGC in 2023 -24, why 
would you not publish it now? Why would you conceal it in a general sum?  
Mr Hehir :  It's part of a range of measures for which , if we identify them all individually and hold the one that 
we want to hold confidential, it gets to be determined by the process of subtraction.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Tell me what other measures are included in that . 
Senator Wong:   The measure description goes to 'additional resourcing for DPM &C to support PM&C to 
deliver on government priorities including national security, the continued operation of AGC and to strengthen 
the information technology systems , including whole -of-government system s'. 
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   So, I'm guessing that there is a diverse and large number of items in there. 
Why would you include spending on the AGC in an amorphous bucket , as opposed to just telling us?  
Mr Hehir :  The assumption probably isn't quite right. There's not a large range of measures.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   How many measures are in there?  
Mr Hehir :  I'd prefer not to say.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Why can the Australian public not know — 
Senator Wong:   Senator  perhaps — 
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   There are the other measures included, the secret ones —I mean, it's a 
puzzle.  
Senator Wong:   Perhaps I can answer in terms of principle, first. Not for publication —I can tell you, as a 
former finance minister, that the range of times where government does that are not great. Usually it is driven by 
an assessment by Finance and departments about there being compelling national -interest reasons , probity reasons 
or commercial reasons that at this point certain funding may not be made public. Now, that doesn't mean that at 
some point some funding may not be made public. But that decision has been made.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   So, is it your view —we're talking about consulting work that's internal to 
the public sector being conducted by a specific agency set up within PM&C. What aspect of that operation meets 
the terms you just spoke in?  
Senator Wong:   I'd refer you to Mr Hehir's evidence.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   It's not Defence. It's not — 
Senator Wong:   I know. I'd refer you to Mr Hehir's earlier evidence.  
Mr Hehir :  Because the total is available in our PBS, you can work your way back if you do a series of 
subtractions. We actually group a small number together. Rather than just leaving one or two items unidentified, 
we group them —the Department of Finance groups them —and then we had a 'not for publication', so people can't 
work it out through simple mathematics.  
Senator Wong:   Senator, perhaps we could turn this around, because I think your motivations are consistent in 
coming to — 
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Yes. 
Senator Wong:   So, are you seeking what information you can get on the continued operation of AGC?  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Yes, exactly.  
Senator Wong:   Okay. We're not in a position to provide that today , for the reasons Mr Hehir outlined.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Because you want to keep some other measure confidential, not this one —
the amount of spending on something else confidential. So, I don't want to play a guessing game with you —'Is it 
larger than the last spend or smaller or whatever?' Could you provide me with a briefing — 
Senator Wong:   We'll try and do that.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 39 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Thank you.  
Senator Wong:   I understand what you're trying to ask, and if can , we will. It also may be a timing issue.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Yes. I think the Australian public, who are very interested in this matter — 
Senator Wong:   Yes, I understand.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   have a right to know the level of government investment in this enterprise, 
which is new. Does it have a continuing commitment? Is it larger or smaller? I don't want to get a briefing which 
means I can't talk to the Australian community about it. The newspapers today are running stories on this. The 
public want to know.  
Mr Hehir :  Again, I don't want to go to exact numbers, if that's okay, but I think the language includes 
continuing investment. I don't think I'd read that as more or less. It's a continuing investment in AGC.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Okay. Now I feel like I'm in the hall of mirrors! I think I need more 
specificity than that. And we need to be able to talk about it publicly.  
Senator Wong:   Well, with respect, we will make decisions in relation to this on the basis that we previously 
outlined, in terms of the accounting disclosure. I'm happy to see whether we can provide you, in a different 
context, with any more information and what can be made public.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Okay. So, I'm interested in the quantum, which you will come back to me 
about, I understand.  
Senator Wong:   If we can.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Yes. Okay —one way or another. Has the government allocated funding to 
the AGC over the next four years?  
Ms K Cooper :  The funding is only for the next financial year. It's not over four years.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   It's for one financial year?  
Ms K Cooper :  Yes. 
Mr Hehir :  I might be able to provide some context for that. The model for AGC has them charging fees 
internally for government work, so it's intended that they would no longer need budget appropriation at a point in 
time.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   So, after the next financial year, the government does not intend to make 
any specific direct allocation to the AGC ; is that correct?  
Mr Hehir :  At this point there 's no budget allocation for AGC beyond next financial year . It's already the 
established intent that AGC would become viable through charging for its work . 
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   So you expect AGC to be self -funding within 12 months?  
Mr Hehir :  Noting that it's already had at least a year, possibly t wo years , of operation, yes.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Two years of operation, in which it 's generated , I understand , $3.6 million 
from  its own work to supplement the allocation of $10.9 million over the last two years . 
Mr Hehir :  We'll keep an eye on it as it goes , but the intent is that it becomes  self-sustaining.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   It is your intention for it to be self -sustainable.  If it isn't self -sustainable, 
what you think will happen within the year?  
Mr Hehir :  We'll do our usual processes . We'll  look at it, we'll do the analysis  and we'll  talk to government 
about what the options are.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Minister, i s it your intention that there should be an ongoing Australian 
government consulting function within the public sector?  
Senator Wong:   I have to say , that was my assumption . I'll be upfront with you: it' s not an area I 've been 
dealing with. I'm happy to take  it on notice.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Thank you. Has there been an evaluation of the pilot stage ? If there has 
been, what were the results?  
Mr Exell :  My colleague  Mr Andrew Knight —I think he is scheduled to appea r tomorrow —has the details  on 
the evaluation.  I don't have that information yet. I think they have done some feedback stuff with the relevant 
departments , which has all been very positive , on the work  he's provided , and it has  been  provided equal ly, if not 
better , to the broader commercial sector in the areas they 're working in. I don't have the details of the ir 
evaluations . Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 40 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Where will  I find Mr Knight  tomorrow?  
Mr Exell :  In the session with the Public Service Commission , I think.  I'll take  on not ice the time and get back 
to you.  
Mr Hehir :  I presume it's with the M inister for Finance , who's  also the Minister for  the P ublic Service.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I look forward to pursuing that.  Thanks for your answers.  
CHAIR:   The coalition has the call.  
Senator CASH:   Can I turn to a line of questioning in  relation to Ukraine. On Monday 3 March, a government 
spokesperson said to media : 
The deployment of Australian troops to support peacekeeping forces in Ukraine is not under consideration at this time.  
Less than 24 hours later, the Prime Minister said it was. To the department: when and how did the department 
first become aware of a proposal to commit Australian peacekeepers to the border between Ukraine and Russia?  
Mr Fletcher :  Senator, I don't believe that that is a correct statement of our policy. I'll ask Mr Titheridge to 
clarify.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you very much. I just want to explore the government spokesperson saying that the 
deployment of Australian troops to support peacekeeping forces in Ukraine is not under consideration and then 
the statement that the Prime Minister made that it was. I just want to explore that.  
Mr Fletcher :  No, that's not correct. The P rime Minister said  that if a request were made it would be 
considered by the government.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Can we explore that, then, just in terms of when and how the department first became 
aware of that position by the Prime Minister?  
Mr Fletcher :  I'll ask Mr Titheridge to respond.  
Mr Titheridge :  The Prime Minister  publicly said after his phone call with Prime Minister Starmer on 8 March 
that they had discussed issues of Ukraine and the coalition of the willing.  
Senator CASH:   Could you say the beginning of that again?  
Mr Titheridge :  Following a bilateral call with — 
Senator CASH:   Sorry, bilateral call.  
Mr Titheridge :  Prime Minister Starmer.  
Senator CASH:   Yes. And that was on 8 March.  
Mr Titheridge :  On 8 March was the call, and the Prime Minister said it on 9 March.  
Senator CASH:   So 8 March was the call. The Prime Minister made the statement on 9 March. In terms of the 
call itself, was there a formal request for any troops to be committed?  
Mr Titheridge :  Beyond what the Prime Minister has mentioned about the content of that call, it wouldn't be 
appropriate for me to reveal anything further. But I can confirm that a request for support  or for peacekeeping  has 
not been received.  
Senator CASH:   Okay, not a problem. I n terms of consultation, did the Prime Minister consult with anybody 
before making the statement on 9 March?  
Mr Titheridge :  I'm not aware of that . 
Senator CASH:   When you say  'not aware ', is that not aware meaning no or not aware  meaning  I need to take 
it on notice?  
Mr Titheridge :  From a departmental perspective, the department is not aware if that occurred.  
Senator CASH:   Minister, regarding the statement made by the Prime Minister o n 9 March, are you aware of 
who the Prime Minister may have consulted with, if anybody? For example, yourself , in terms of being the 
foreign minister ; the defence minister ; the Attorney -General?  
Senator Wong:   I'll take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   In ter ms of your role as the foreign minister, did the Prime Minister consult with you?  
Senator Wong:   I'm not here as the foreign minister ; I'm here as representing  the Prime Minister. And, a s 
Senator Payne said regularly, I don't go into discussions , but I'll put it this way : I was aware of the position.  
Senator CASH:   That's  really the answer I was asking for.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 41 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Wong:   Again, I'd add a few points. First, as Mr Fletcher has said, the position that we have outlined 
is not we will but we will consider a request. And I think it's important to do that. I would also note  that—and I 
appreciate that you're in opposition —there is a distinction between what Mr Hastie has said and what Dutton has 
said. So Mr Dutton has ruled this out and Mr Hastie has left the door open.  
Senator CASH:   Minister, I understand that approximately nine minutes ago the department published a tweet 
advising that 'the government is now operating in accordance with caretaker conventions ' and then deleted the 
tweet. It sa id—the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet@pmc _gov_au:  
The Government is now operating in accordance with caretaker conventions, pending the outcome of the 2025 federal 
election. Comments have been disabled for this period. Link to pmc.gov.au/caretaker.  
Underneath was a document that said 'Guidance on Caretaker Conventions '. 
Senator Wong:   Oh, dear! It's going to be interesting to see who fesses up on this.  
Senator CASH:   But are you able to confirm that?  
CHAIR:   Who accidentally went live before they were supposed to?  
Senator Wong:   I wasn't aware of it until you — 
Senator CASH:   It was tweeted and deleted.  
Senator Wong:   No, I wasn't aware of it until you indicated it. Obviously the document is the caretaker 
conventions.  
Senator CASH:   Correct. I'll ask the department , then . 
Senator Wong:   Andrew Walter is here , and h e's looking very professional , and he's about to say something.  
Senator CASH:   Are we in caretaker right now?  
Mr Walter :  No, we're not in caretaker right now.  
Senator CASH:   Why did PM&C nine minutes ago —or probably 10 minutes ago  now—put online  that the 
government is now operating in accordance with caretaker conventions?  
Senator Wong:   Does that mean I can leave?  
Senator CASH:   I think we'd all leave —exactly!  The bad news is that the Prime Minister didn't get to call the 
election ; PM&C did. I want to know who's running the country . Good God!  
Mr Walter :  My colleagues are trying to work out why this occurred , so I will just say that obviously this was 
an error  and we apologise for that. It was up for a period of four minutes. I became aware of it approximately nine 
minutes ago.  
Senator CASH:   That's quite good.  
Mr Walter :  My corporate colleagues are addressing how this occurred. I can assure you that we're not in 
caretaker. I can say that there is , of course , guidance on the caretaker conventions , which is available on our 
website and has been available on our website since mid -December. So that is available but, no, we are not in 
caretaker. This was clearly an error . We are trying to find out why it occurred , and we apologise.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you, I could ask you, seeing as it's your department who seem to know, how long  it 
will be until  we're in caretaker  and whether  the person has been told to hold off for another 12 hours, but that 
would be facetious.  
In the last few minutes, I have some questions in relation to the PLAN warships that were circumnavigating  
Australia . Has the Prime Minister raised concerns with President Xi Jinping or the Chinese government about the 
live firing exercises that took place without warning and the circumnavigation of Australia  by PLA vessels last 
month?  
Mr Fletcher :  The government has made clear its concerns about the lack of advanced notification of those 
live-fire exercises at the political level —the foreign minister herself —and also at the diplomatic level in Beijing 
and through Defence channels . But, no, the Prime Minister has not had direct communication with Xi Jinping 
since that time.  
Senator CASH:   That was my question . Thank you very much. S o the Prime Minister hasn't raised these 
concerns directly at a prime ministerial -presidential level. When  did the Prime Minister last communicate with 
President Xi?  
Mr Fletcher :  I believe it was  in November last year , when they met in the margins of the G20 summit.  
Senator CASH:   So the form that woul d have taken would have just be en a pull -aside  at the margins of the —
did you say ' G20 summit '? Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 42 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Fletcher :  It was a  bilateral meeting  in the margin s of the summit.  
Senator CASH:   When did the Prime Minister last seek a call with President Xi?  
Mr Fletcher :  I'll have to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Minister, do you have any knowledge of when the Prime Minister last sought a call 
with President Xi?  
Senator Wong:   I think Mr Fletcher has just taken it on notice.  
Senator CASH:   I was merely asking if you had any knowledg e; that's all.  
Senator Wong:   Not off the top of my head, no.  
Senator CASH:   I understand the department can take it on notice, but I was deferring to you as the relevant 
representative of the Prime Minister. In terms of the issues that we are discussing, there's been no phone call 
between the Prime Minister and President Xi. Has the Prime Minister raised those issues in any correspondence 
with the President?  
Senator Wong:   No. The agreed approach , which I think I went through at length on the last occasion , was that 
I would raise this directly with Foreign Minister Wang  Yi, and I did so in a face -to-face meeting , and we would 
have —sorry, I was distracted  for a moment . Mr Fletcher , as the former ambassador, would be able to talk about 
the approach that is usually taken , which includes engagement and representations from Defence , both in Beijing 
and also in  Australia.  But the detail of how we responded on this specific occasion would have to be dealt with by 
Foreign Affairs tomorrow.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Based on that —I'm just looking through the rest of my questions  again —does the 
Prime Minister believe that it was concerning that Australia did not receive the advance notification from China , 
when PNG did?  
Mr Fletcher :  I think that there was some confusion in the media about who spoke to PNG about the Chinese 
task group . In fact it  was Australia that briefed PNG on the arrival of the task group in our waters.  
Senator CASH:   How  could we brief PNG when we didn't receive advanced notification from the Chinese 
ourselves?  
Senator Wong:   There's a distinction between  what occurred and 'presence '. 
Senator CASH:   I can't hear you , sorry.  
Mr Fletcher :  Senator, we were aware of the Chinese warships before they arrived in Australian waters — 
Senator Wong:   And we briefed PNG.  
Mr Fletcher :  and we briefed about them.  
Senator Wong:   So that would be the media reports that Mr  Fletcher — 
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Mr Fletcher :  If there was media reporting that PNG heard it from the Chinese ambassador, that is —well, I 
have no knowledge whether there was any contact between the Chinese ambassador and the PNG government . I 
doubt it. They heard about it from us.  
Senator CASH:   Okay, thank you. We've only got a few minutes left, so we've just got  one other line of 
questioning we'd like to go through . 
Senator McGRATH:   A report in the Saturday Paper  on 15 March revealed the government only invited the 
progressive Independents —excluding  the Greens, the coalition and members of the Parliamentary Joint 
Committee on Intelligence and Security —to a briefing on the ONI's climate risk  assessment report. This briefing 
was held on 9 December  2024. Are you aware of this reporting?  
Mr Fletcher :  No. 
Senator McGRATH:   I pose it to you, Minister.  
Senator Wong:   I don't have any response.  
Senator McGRATH:   Deputy Secretary?  
Mr Hehir :  I'm not aware of it.  
Senator McGRATH:   Can you confirm th is briefing took place?  
Mr Hehir :  I said I'm not aware of it. I 'd need to check with relevant officials.  
Senator McGRATH:   Did Prime Minister and Cabinet coordinate this briefing?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 43 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Hehir :  Senator, if the briefing was done by ONI,  they would normally arrange the briefing themselves.   
Ms Morony :  Senator, I'll just  confirm  that we're not aware of that briefing.  
Senator McGRATH:   So Prime Minister and Cabinet had no role in coordinating the briefing or organising it 
or anything like that ? 
Ms Morony :  Correct.  
Senator McGRATH:   That's all good. Thank you —an easy one for you.  
Senator CASH:   Can I go to questions in relation to the 60 Minutes  report on Sunday 16 March  and further 
revelations of the infiltration of the CFMEU by organised crime . Minister, has the Prime Minister watched the 
recent 60 Minutes  report?  
Senator Wong:   Sorry ; I came prepared for budget  questions. I will take on notice whether he —I believe he's 
made  a public statement about it , so I'd refer you to that . 
Senator CASH:   Is the Prime Minister planning to write to the CFMEU administrator in relation to what was 
raised in the report?  
Mr Hehir :  Again, I'm not sure what the actions of the Prime Minister are here , but what I'd say is that this is a 
matter that should be dealt with in the DEWR estimates . The responsible minister is Minister Watt , from 
recollection.  
Senator CASH:   I understand that , but I'm asking you  what the Prime Minister's knowledge is, given the 
seriousness — 
Mr Hehir :  Sorry, Senator, y ou asked a question about whether he would write. Normally, the relevant 
minister would write . 
Senator CASH:   I understand that. This is not a normal situation. These were very serious  allegations. There 
was a woman that was being bashed by a health and safety representative , and that was screened across 
Australia's televisions. I will also , obviously , ask about it in DEWR, but I'm just asking the level of the Prime 
Minister's knowledge : whether or not he has watched it —and I think Minister Wong has said she will take that on 
notice —and whether or not the Prime Minister is planning to write to the CFMEU administrator in relation to 
this. 
Senator Wong:   These are matters for DEWR . I would make the point , first, that we all stand against violence 
against women , and the violence described in the  allegations was unacceptable. Secondly,  I understand the 
allegations would not have come to light without the investigation initiated by the administrator and that they 
have been referred to the AFP. I would say to you that these are matters that should be dealt with in DEWR . In 
relation to the Prime Minister's engagement, as I said, I would refer you to his public comments. I don't have them 
in front of me that I can see at this point,  but I know  that he was asked about them —well, I don't know, but I 
believe that he was asked about them —and I'd refer you to those comments.  
CHAIR:   It's now time for lunch.  
Proceedings suspended from 12:46 to 13:54  
CHAIR:   I remind senators of their obligation s under the Behaviour Code for Australian Parliamentarians to 
treat witnesses with dignity, respect, courtesy and fairness.  The Senate —and, by extension , this committee —is 
clearly designed to be a place where ideas will be debated and contested ; we understand that. We understand that 
these debates sometimes become heated. But intimidating and threatening behaviour is not acceptable and should 
not be tolerated, and I will seek, as chair, to keep trying to uphold those standards , and I would like senators here 
to reflect on that. This is a workplace, not only for us but for our staff, for parliamentary staff and indeed for the 
many public servants who come and give evidence here according to their duties. As we understand, no public 
servant would behave in an unacceptable  way in a public forum, and I, as chair, would seek to expect the same 
standard of behaviour from senators. We all have a role to uphold a healthy and safe workplace where people feel 
valued and respected , and I would really like for senators to bear this in mind as we continue our proceedings and 
to keep these obligations in mind at all times. We can now resume with Prime Minister and Cabinet. Senator 
Cash?  
Senator CASH:   I will  just turn to an answer to a question on notice , question No. 32. It was:  
Senator CASH: How many times has the Prime Minister visited Western Australia  and met with members of the live sheep 
export industry?  
Ms Williams: I'd have to take that on notice — 
I asked the question again — Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 44 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  … I don't have that information with me here today.  
I then asked:  
Minister Wong, are you aware of whether or not the Prime Minister or how many times the Prime Minister, in all his visits to 
Western Australia, has met with members of the live sheep export industry?  
You also advised that you would take that on notice. The answer that came back  was: 
The Prime Minister regularly meets with a range of stakeholders.  
Can I just ask again, is anybody here aware if the Prime Minister has ever met, whil st in Western Australia, with 
members of the live sheep export industry?  
Senator WONG:   Can I just get the question on notice?  
Senator CASH:   It's 0032.  
Ms Williams :  I don't have anything to add to my previous evidence  on this . 
Senator CASH:   Thank you, Ms Williams. Minister Wong, are you aware if the Prime Minister has ever on 
one of his visits to Western Australia met with members of the live sheep export industry?  
Senator WONG:   I've just seen the answer that was provided by the Prime Minister's  portfolio , and I don't 
have anything to add to that. And I also don't have any personal knowledge.  
Senator CASH:   I accept  that. It's not a problem. Can I confirm, though, as we are about to go to an election,  
that the Prime Minister maintains his policy position that a future government will see the end of the live sheep 
export industry?  
Senator WONG:   Again, this is not an issue for this portfolio, but I think I 've said to you in the chamber  that 
we flagged some time ago  that legislation has passed the parliament which ends live sheep exports by sea from 1 
May 2028  and that the government is providing just under $140 million to assist with that transition.  We have 
obviously, as I think I might've said to you in the chamber, gone to two elections with a commitment to end this.  
Senator CASH:   I just wanted to confirm — 
Senator Wong:   I appreciate, Senator Cash, that — 
Senator CASH:   from Western Australia.  
Senator Wong:   you don't agree with it. Obviously t here are some who are very upset by this, but this is also a 
commitment that we've made over two elections. We're providing substantial transitional assistance and 
substantial notice, and we're very willing to continue to work with the industry to transition to alternative products 
and markets.  
Senator CASH:   Can I just return to what is obviously the unfortunate tweet by the Department of the Prime 
Minister and Cabinet announcing that the government is now operating in accordance with caretaker convention. 
It was up for four minutes, as the official has advised, and it was taken down. What is the process for actually 
putting up such a tweet?  
Mr Hehir :  I don't have that information in front of me, but I might see if I've got one of my officials here — 
Senator CASH:   Would you mind? This is a process question in terms of the process that a department goes 
through in preparing, putting up and getting ready to execute  a tweet . 
Mr Hehir :  I might just start by adding my apology to the fact that this was sent out, as Mr Walter said, clearly 
in error, but I have asked the team , in actual fact , to have a look at their processes to ensure that this type of error 
doesn't happen again. But I might ask Mr Spyrou to talk you through the process.  
Mr Spyrou :  The process of putting tweets out, especially ones where we are prepared ahead of time, involves 
queuing those tweets through a system and then, when we 're told to go, pressing a button to publish them. What 
has happened on this occasion is, instead of actually pressing 'save', a colleague has pressed 'publish'. It was 
human error.  
Senator CASH:   You've obviously gone and done an investigation into what occurred. When was the tweet 
prepared?  
Mr Spyrou :  I'd have to take on notice when it was prepared, but we would prepare tweets of this nature quite 
a while back to be ready for any eventuality.  
Senator CASH:   But, obviously, in terms of the process, it was either published or saved today, and it was 
published. I'm assuming you don't just publish something. It was a live tweet today that the departmental official , 
instead of hitting 'save' , has hit 'publish' . Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 45 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Spyrou :  The departmental official  was obviously going into the tweet and perhaps amend ing the tweet, 
and, instead of saving it, they pressed 'publish'. It's literally human error —a slip of the hand.  
Senator McGRATH:   Who discovered the error?  
Mr Spyrou :  It was certainly brought to my attention by my team, and we brought it down within the four 
minutes that you've heard mentioned by my colleague Andrew Walter. That's how I discovered it.  
Senator McGRATH:   In relation to the movements of the Governor -General, Deputy Secretary, has there 
been any contact between the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Office of the Official 
Secretary to the Governor -General this week?  
Mr Hehir :  There's routine contact between my group within the Department of the Prime Minister and 
Cabinet and the Office of the Official Secretary to the Governor -General . 
Senator McGRATH:   My understanding is the Governor -General was due to depart on a trip. Was the Office 
of the Official Secretary to the Governor -General advised to not depart on that trip?  
Mr Hehir :  I'm not aware of that.  
Senator McGRATH:   You're not aware of that?  
Mr Hehir :  No. 
Senator McGRATH:   Is there someone who can assist?  
Mr Hehir :  I'm honestly not sure —Mr Walter is coming to the table. Again, m y understanding is that the 
arrangements for the Governor -General are the responsibility of the official secretary, but Mr Walter can answer.  
Mr Walter :  Sorry, Senator. What was your exact question?  
Senator McGRATH:   The question is  in relation to contact between PM&C and the Office of the Official 
Secretary to the Governor -General. I think it's the worst  kept secret in this building that the Prime Minister is 
going to the Governor -General's residence tomorrow to call an election , so what contact has there been between 
the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Office of the Official Secretary to the Governor -
General to ensure that the Governor -General is at home?  
Mr Walter :  The timing for the election is entirely a matter for the Prime Minister.  
Senator McGRATH:   I wasn't asking that question, though.  
Mr Walter :  The timing is entirely a matter for the Prime Minister , and the Prime Minister would handle any 
communications with the Governor -General in regard to that.  
Senator McGRATH:   So there have been no communications  between Prime Minister and Cabinet and the 
Office of the  Official  Secretary to the Governor -General in  relation to  the whereabouts of the Governor -General 
this week?  
Mr Walter :  I speak to the official secretary three or four times a week on average , and I usually have some 
idea where the Governor -General is , because we need the Governor -General for a whole range of purposes. Sorry, 
that's a terrible way of putting it. We rely on the Governor -General in a whole range of circumstances, including , 
of course, for Executive Council meetings and so forth , so I often know where the Governor -General is. But , in 
relation to the question you're asking, this is entirely a matter for the Prime Minister around election timing and 
communication with the Governor -General in that regard.  
Senator McGRATH:   Just help me with a p rocess question here : how does the Prime Minister know where 
the Governor -General is when the Prime Minister wishes to call an  election?  
Senator Wong:   I don't think you should assume, Senator, that the Prime Minister's only contact with the 
Governor -General is through Mr Walter.  
Senator CASH:   So the Prime Minister would phone the Governor -General  directly ? 
Senator Wong:   I'm just saying I suspect that Mr Walter, as great as he is, is probably not the only conduit 
between the Governor -General and the Prime Minister.  
Senator McGRATH:   What other conduits are there , Minister ? 
Senator Wong:   I can take that on notice.  
Senator McGRATH:   Does the Prime Minister use Signal to contact the Governor -General to find out where 
the Governor -General is?  
Senator Wong:   I can take that on notice.  
Senator McGRATH:   Does the Prime Minister use Signal ? Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 46 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Wong:   I'll take that on notice.  
Senator McGRATH:   Do you use Signal ? 
Senator Wong:   Yes, I do.  
Senator McGRATH:   Do you use Signal to contact the Prime Minister?  
Senator Wong:   Senator, if this is some attempt to get into some  current stories, I think you use Signal too, 
and so does Senator Cash.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm not a minister.  
Senator Wong:   I know she does.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm not a minister. Here is the  question I'm asking , though . The  election is going to  be 
called tomorrow. I'm sure Australians would like to know the process of how the Prime Minister works out where 
the Governor -General is , because the Governor -General — 
Senator Wong:   Actually, Senator, I don't reckon Australians  do want to know that. You might want to  know 
that. You might want to  fill up some space in these questions.  
Senator McGRATH:   The Governor -General clearly has shifted — 
Senator Wong:   Senator, I was responding to you. I don't think Australians are hanging on every kind of piece 
of evidence about how the Prime Minister and the Governor -General actually talk to each other.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think Sky News does. I think Sky News is  quite interested to know when the Prime 
Minister contacts the Governor -General about the election.  
Senator Wong:   Are you working for Sky News  here? 
Senator McGRATH:   I don't know , but I think Andrew C lennell would be interested, as would Kieran Gilbert 
and the team.  
Senator Wong:   Are you working for Sky News now?  
Senator McGRATH:   No, but— 
Senator Wong:   I'm just wondering.  
Senator McGRATH:   they're pretty interested. Australians are  pretty interested.  
Senator Wong:   Sure. Okay. So what's the question?  
Senator McGRATH:   The question related to  this: w e just want to confirm —given that you said, M r Walter, 
that the timing is entirely a matter for the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister would handle any 
communications with the Governor -General with regard to that —that that is correct. So Prime Minister and 
Cabinet has no involvement with the Governor -General in relation to the Prime Minister going to the Governor -
General in relation to calling an election and the timing of the election?  
Senator Wong:   Senator, Mr Walter answered that, and what he said, I think on two or three occasions now, is 
that the matter of the timing of an election is entirely a matter for the Prime Minister. It might have been other 
things as well. I don't think it's fair to put Mr Walter  in a p osition of trying to draw him into what the Prime 
Minister's decision will be.  
Senator McGRATH:   I just want to confirm that PM&C has no role — 
Senator Wong:   No role.  
Senator McGRATH:   It's the Prime Minister who directly contacts the Governor -General in relation to 
meeting with the Governor -General to call an election.  
Mr Walter :  If I can put it in general terms — 
Senator McGRATH:   I'm just trying to clarify. I realise we're seemingly going around in circles.  
Mr Walter :  If the Prime Minister wishes to meet with the Governor -General —on any matter —the Prime 
Minister would usually arrange that, or his office would usually arrange that, directly with the official secretary or 
the official secretary's office. So, we would not ordinarily play a role in arranging meetings between the 
Governor -General and the Prime Minister on any matter.  
Senator CASH:   Had the tweet been cleared to go up?  
Mr Hehir :  My understanding is that it hadn't been cleared, no.  
Senator CASH:   Was there any reason that it needed to be amended today?  
Mr Hehir :  I'm not sure — Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 47 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Otherwise, why was it —maybe Mr Spyrou could help us — 
Mr Spyrou :  There was no specific reason it needed to be amended today, but , using the system under the 
company name of Sprinklr , we queue a whole bunch of tweets , or posts, and we want to be in a position where we 
are ready for any eventuality.  
Senator CASH:   Do you know if the tweet was amended?  
Mr Spyrou :  I don't know that, no.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. But , unfortunately for this person , they 'publish' instead of 'save'.  
Mr Spyrou :  That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   Could I very briefly ask some questions in relation to the decision on the imposition of the 
tariffs on aluminium and steel imports? How many times and on what dates has the Prime Minister communicated 
with President Trump?  
Mr Fletcher :  The Pr ime Minister has had two conversations with President Trump. The first was immediately 
after his election, and the second was I think on 11 February.  
Senator CASH:   Has the Prime Minister sought a further call with President Trump?  
Mr Fletcher :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   When was this done?  
Mr Fletcher :  I don't know exactly, but it was on or about 12 March —slightly before 12 March, I believe.  
Senator CASH:   Have you had a  response back yet from the President's office or the White House?  
Mr Fletcher :  The contact with the White House is being conducted by our embassy in Washington, which is 
in direct contact with the Prime Minister's office. I'm unaware of the nature of the current discussions about a call.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. But you believe that on or about 12 March the Prime Minister, or his office, put in a 
request for a further phone call with President Trump?  
Mr Fletcher :  Yes. I think Ambassador Rudd made that statement at roughly around that time. I don't know 
exactly when the request was made.  
Senator CASH:   That's why I said 'on or about'. You didn't give a specific date. But at this point in time, 27 
March, we don't know whether there's been a response from the White House ? 
Mr Fletcher :  That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   On 26 March the Prime Minister advised media that he had invited the President to Australia. 
On what date was the invitation issued?  
Mr Fletcher :  I believe that was the conversation on 11 February.  
Senator CASH:   How was the invitation issued?  
Mr Fletcher :  It was in the phone call.  
Senator CASH:   Has there been a response?  
Mr Fletcher :  Yes. Both leaders agreed that they would like to visit and meet up soon.  
Senator CASH:   What's your definition of 'soon'?  
Mr Fletcher :  I expect sometime in the coming months.  
Senator CASH:   When and how did the Prime Minister first become aware that Australia would not receive an 
exemption to the tariffs imposed by the United States on aluminium and steel exports?  
Mr Fletcher :  I'll take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Is there a reason you have to take it on notice?  
Mr Fletcher :  Because I don't know the answer.  
Senator CASH:   Does anybody here know the answer?  
Mr Fletcher :  The time difference with the United States means that things often happen when we're  asleep . 
So at some point on the evening of the day in question Ambassador Rudd had a meeting with the commerce 
secretary , during which we found out the outcome of the US consideration of our request s in relation  to 
aluminium and steel tariffs . During the same period of time, some Australian journalists managed to track down 
the White House spokesperson and , similarly , asked her the question and got the answer . So by the time I woke 
up it was evident , from the media but also from within government , that the decision had been made and Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 48 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  communicated to us. You asked me , 'When did the Prime Minister find out and how ?' I simply don't know but it 
would have been that morning, like everybody else.  
Senator CASH:   If you don't know, why do you say it would have been that morning? Are you making an 
assumption there?  
Mr Fletcher :  Because the meeting where we found out was during the night.  
Senator CASH:   Senator Wong, are you aware when the Prime Minister first became aware that Australia 
would not receive an exemption to the tariffs?  
Senator Wong:   I'd have to take that on notice and go back . But I would make the point, as I said in the 
opening statement, tariffs are a central plank of the Trump administration's economic agenda . We will continue to 
work for the best outcome. In relation to steel and aluminium, I made the point publicly that in excess of 30 
countries got steel and/or aluminium exemptions on the last occasion , that the Trump administration has made 
clear that they now regret providing those exemptions and that no exemptions were given on steel and aluminium 
to any partner at the time of the announcement. Obviously,  we've also made comments —the Prime Minister has 
made comments —about that , but those are the facts of the steel and aluminium tariffs. It 's a very different 
scenario to that which occurred before.  
Senator CASH:   On 12 March the Prime Minister sai d:  
Australia will continue working hard for a different outcome, and discussions with the Trump Administration are ongoing.  
Is the Prime Minister leading those  discussions on behalf of Australia?  
Mr Fletcher :  Ambassador Rudd is leading those discussions in Washington , supported by the government —
whether it 's phone calls by the trade minister , senior officials ' visits  or other contact  that we have with the US 
administration .  
Senator CASH:   But Ambassador Rudd is — 
Senator Wong:   But there's a distinction between negotiations and the approach and how we're handling it,  
and it is obviously led by the Prime Minister and relevant cabinet ministers.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the approach being led by the Prime Minister — 
Senator Wong:   My point is , Mr Fletcher is correctly identifying  that you have  your negotiating level . And 
what we are dealing with , at the moment, as you may well be aware, is the review of —this is probably a matter 
for tomorrow —the reciprocal tariffs that the administration has outlined ; that's a very broad -ranging assessment 
that the administration is making across countries.  We've continued to make the point that (a) the US has a trade 
surplus with Australia , and (b) we apply  no tariffs to US goods entering Australia. But the  policy approach —the 
principles of our approach  that the Prime Minister has outlined —is that w e will continue to stand up for Australia. 
We will work hard for the best outcome . We are realistic . We certainly won't be trading away things that are a 
part of who Australia is or what our country is, which include the PBS and our healthcare system.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of Ambassador Rudd leading the negotiations on Australia's behalf, whom has 
Ambassador Rudd met with  in the administration?  
Mr Fletcher :  We'll have to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Why do you need to take it on notice?  
Senator Wong:   It's the wrong  portfolio.  
Senator CASH:   This is Prime Minister and Cabinet. I would have thought that the Prime Minister has an 
interest.  
Senator Wong:   It's a long list, but it's also the wrong portfolio. He works in the Department of Foreign 
Affairs  and Trade.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, he does, but this is in relation to the Prime Minister and his knowledge.  
Senator Wong:   No, you asked for a list. That 's not what you asked. You asked for a list of who m Ambassador 
Rudd has met with. We can discuss that tomorrow.  
Senator CASH:   In 2018, when Australia secured an exemption from  US tariffs applied to Australian steel and 
aluminium, did the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet play a role in the campaign to secure the 
exemption?  
Mr Fletcher :  I'll take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Do you have any knowledge of that?  
Mr Fletcher :  No. Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 49 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Does anybody here have any knowledge  of that?  
Senator Wong:   I can point you to what Mr Turnbull said . He's talked about how i t's very different this time 
round  now and how much harder it is. I also would point out that  I think it took about a year for that to be landed . 
But, no, I don't have direct knowledge. I think you were a cabinet minister at the time.  
CHAIR:   Thank you, senators. We are due to move on now to the Department of Finance.  
Senator Wong:   Is there anything more? I'm conscious that I was late, s o, if there's anything more for a few 
minutes, I'd be happy to — 
Senator CASH:   That's okay.  
Senator COLBECK:   We have kept you late.  
Senator Wong:   I'm sorry about that.  
CHAIR:   We can release the Department of  the Prime Minister and Cabinet . We might see you next week.  
Mr Hehir :  Chair, I need to clarify somethin g. Is that okay?  
CHAIR:   Yes. 
Mr Hehir :  In relation to the questions around AGC, Australian Government Consulting , I need to clarify that 
there 's been a decision for one year of funding , which  we talked about. The re will be an ongoing process to 
monitor how close they are to being self -sustaining , and that will be done through the years.  
CHAIR:   Thank you . I think it was Senator Barbara Pocock that asked that.  
Mr Hehir :  It was.  
CHAIR:   We'll make sure that 's conveyed.   Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 50 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  FINANCE PORTFOLIO  
In Attendance  
Senator Farrell, Minister for Trade and Tourism, Special Minister of State  
Senator Gallagher, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women , Minister for the Public Service, Minister for 
Government Services  
Department of Finance  
Executive  
Ms Jenny Wilkinson PSM, Secretary  
Outcome 1: Support sustainable Australian government finances through providing high quality policy 
advice and operational support to government and Commonwealth entities to maintain effective and 
efficient use of public resources  
Ms Cath Patterson, Deputy Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Paul Pfitzner, First Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Natasha Cole, First Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Stephen Sorbello, First Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Louise Sasaki, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Hannah Lipshut, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Gemma Cooper, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Romesh Guneratne, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Christine Duke, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Donna Valenti, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Martin Rocks, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Nathan Williamson, Deputy Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Anna Harmer PSM, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Amy Fox, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Mr Simon Writer PSM, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Outcome 2: Support an efficient and high -performing public sector through providing leadership to 
Commonwealth entities in ongoing improvements to public sector governance, including through systems, 
frameworks, policy, advice, and service delivery  
Mr Richard Windeyer, Deputy Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Nick McClintock, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Libor Pelecky, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Louise Starr, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Elliot Zwangobani, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Suzanne Hinchcliffe, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr David Webster, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Amy Parry, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Sacha de Re, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Scott Thurbon, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Cameron Jose , Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Fotos Andreou, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Andrew Danks, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Gareth Sebar, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Sabrena King, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Rachel Antone, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Meagan Wilson, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 51 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Grant Stevens, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Paul Hubbard, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Lauren Le Cerf, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Kelly Wood, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Nathan Williamson, Deputy Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Amy Fox, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Mr Simon Writer, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Mr Sebastian Powney, Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Lucinda Atkinson, Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Mr Andrew Lalor, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Gayle Milnes, National Data Commissioner, Office of the National Data Commissioner  
Mr Andrew Taylor, Assistant Secretary, Office of the National Data Commissioner  
Mr Simon Newnham, Deputy Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Grant Lovelock, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Glen Casson, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Peter Qui, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Patrick Roberts, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Catherine McLachlan, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Laura Sham, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Carolyn Driessen, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Neil Dawson, Chief Financial Officer, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Sally Harris, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Kelly Hoffmeister, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Outcome 3: Support for parliamentarians and others as required by the Australian government through 
the delivery of, and advice on, entitlements and targeted assistance  
Mr Simon Newnham, Deputy Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Shannon Frazer, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Grant Lovelock, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Amanda Bruce, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Alex McKellar, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Sally Bektas, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Laura Sham, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Australian Electoral Commission  
Mr Jeff Pope, Acting Electoral Commissioner  
Ms Kath Gleeson, Acting Deputy Electoral Commissioner  
Mr Michael Lynch, First Assistant Commissioner, Electoral Integrity and Operations Group  
Mr Thomas Ryan, First Assistant Commissioner, Enterprise Transformation Group  
Ms Rachael Spalding, First Assistant Commissioner, Enabling and Regulation Group  
Mr Andrew Johnson, Chief Legal Officer  
Ms Joanne Reid, Assistant Commissioner, Disclosure, Party Registration and Redistribution Branch  
Ms Sally So, Chief Financial Officer  
Digital Transformation Agency  
Mr Chris Fechner, Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Wayne Poels, General Manager, Digital Investment Advice and Sourcing  
Ms Lucy Poole, General Manager, Strategy, Planning and Performance  
Mr Tom Gilmartin, Chief Operating Officer  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 52 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Jamie Whitcombe, Branch Manager, Portfolio Assurance  
Ms Lauren Mills, Branch Manager, Strategy and Prioritisation  
Mr Tom Marwick, Acting Branch Manager, Australian Government Architecture and Policy  
Mr Chris Huang, Chief Financial Officer  
Future Fund Management Agency  
Dr Raphael Arndt, Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Ben Samild, Chief Investment Officer  
Independent Parliamentary Expenses Authority  
Ms Christina Grant, Chief Executive Officer  
Ms Nicole Pearson, Branch Manager, Transparency, Assurance and Legal  
Mr Marco Spaccavento, Branch Manager, Corporate, Governance and Strategy  
Mr Michael Frost, Branch Manager, Travel, Education and Advice  
Parliamentary Workplace Support Service  
Ms Leonie McGregor, Chief Executive Officer  
Ms Kate Wandmaker, Deputy Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Scott Mischke, Chief People Officer  
Ms Leanne Martens, Acting Chief Operations Officer  
ASC Pty Ltd  
Mr Stuart Whiley, Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director  
Mr Ashley Menadue, Chief Financial Officer  
Mr Paul Gay, Chief Operating Officer , Multi Class Sustainment  
Mr Alex Walsh, Chief Nuclear and Capability Officer  
Mr Richard Windeyer, Deputy Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Mr David Webster, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Mr Sacha de Re, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Australian Naval Infrastructure Pty Ltd  
Mr Andrew Seaton, Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director  
Ms Jane Lavender -Baker, Executive General Manager , Corporate Affairs and People  
Mr Paul Bates, Chief Operating Officer  
Mr Richard Windeyer, Deputy Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Mr David Webster, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Mr Sacha de Re, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Department of Finance  
[14:25]  
CHAIR:   Thank you to the minister, the Hon. Don Farrell, Special Minister of State. Ms Jenny Wilkinson, 
welcome to you as well and other officers of the Department of Finance. May I as k, Ms Wilkinson or Minister, 
whether either of  you have an opening statement?  
Ms Wilkinson :  I don't.  
Senator Farrell:   Thank you for the opportunity to make an opening statement , but given the shortened nature 
of today's events I think it might be good if I save my comments for another day and give the opposition the 
maximum chance to ask the ir questions —and my Senate colleagues.  
CHAIR:   Senator Hume.  
Senator HUME:   Can I first, as per convention, request that you table the government's staffing  tables?  
Senator Farrell:   I think's being handed out as we — 
Senator HUME:   Oh, look at that! How did you anticipate that question, Minister?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 53 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Farrell:   We’re one step ahead on this occasion, again, to make sure you've got it in the same format 
to give you the maximum time to ask all your questions.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you very much. Can I kick off on another topic? This is probably directed to the 
secretary and perhaps department officials . Is it correct th at the  department is responsible for providing expert 
advice on the application of non -travel expenses under the Parliamentary Business Resources Act 2017 and 
advice on the Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984? Is that correct?  
Ms Wilkinson :  That's correct.  
Senator HUME:   Would it also be correct to say that if there is a question in relation to the application of the 
provisions in these acts that your department is considered the government's first point of contact, whether that is 
from the minister or from other parts of government?  
Ms Wilkinson :  That would be correct.  
Senator HUME:   We've had some  previous discussions in this committee about the basis for the department's 
expertise. Obviously , you have staff in the division who are  lawyers who provide advice on these acts —correct?  
Ms Wilkinson :  We have staff in the division who have long -standing experience in the administration of these 
acts. Correct me if I am wrong, I think there are some staff in that division who have legal expertise. We also 
have a legal branch in the department , and, of course, we have access to legal advice from time to time from AGS 
lawyers if and when we consider we should get that advice.  
Senator HUME:   You might have anticipated my next question. I was going to ask if you ever seek legal 
advice externally on the application of those acts.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Yes, w e do seek legal advice on occasion in relation to  those acts, just like any department 
would in relation to any piece of legislation that they're responsible for.  
Senator HUME:   Are there  any particular circumstances that you could share with me where you might seek 
that external advice , and where would it come from? Would it always be the Australian government lawyer , or 
would it be outside of that as well?  
Ms Wilkinson :  You can never be really definitive , obviously,  about where you 'd seek legal advice from. 
Obviously, m atters  of a constitutional nature we would always ask AGS because of the tied nature of th e advice 
that's required. But, for example, in the process of working through the new ministerial determinations that were 
issued by the minister in February, we worked with AGS in the process of developing those determinations and 
providing advice around them. We do it on an as -needs basis.  
Senator HUME:   Would it be correct to say you wouldn 't provide advice that wasn't based in the law that you 
were advising on? Is that correct?  
Ms Wilkinson :  We endeavour to always provide assistance to parliamentarians on a very wide range of 
matters. If you 're asking whether we seek legal advice on every single question that comes through, the answer is 
we don't and it wouldn 't be feasible to. But we try to provide advice to be as helpful as possible to 
parliamentarians  in the application of the P BR framework, the MOP(S)  framework and all of our broader 
frameworks  for th e ultimate objective , which  is to ensure that the use of public resources is in accordance with the 
acts.  
Senator HUME:   So there are staff that aren't lawyers that are employed to interpret the acts and their 
application?  
Ms Wilkinson :  That wouldn't be the way I  would  put it. I would say t here are staff who are not lawyers who 
provide assistance through our call centre , for example. That's not uncommon. That's very common in Services 
Australia and the ATO . There is guidance that they provide — 
Senator HUME:   But the guidance they would provide surely would have to be based on views on a legal 
advice of how those laws are applied?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Certainly we endeavour to provide advice which is consistent with the objective of the act. 
One of the things that is challenging here,  of which I know you're aware, is that these are principle  based 
frameworks. The overriding principle is that parliamentarians are accountable and responsible for the use of 
public resources that are within  their responsibilities , so they have to make judgements about what's lawful and 
reasonable and defen sible. Principle  based frameworks always have an element of judgement in them.  
Senator HUME:   You're right . I would assume , though,  that the overriding principle is that the advice that is 
received is consistent with the law . 
Ms Wilkinson :  We would always endeavour for that to be the case. That's right.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 54 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   I'm assuming your last statement implies that you understand that there's significant personal 
liability that rests on breaches of the PBR Act, and that's borne by the parliamentarian that fails to comply .  
Ms Wilkinson :  The overarching framework is clear that it is the responsibility of parliamentarians to ensure 
that—they are responsible for ensuring that  they expend public resources in ways which are —as I said , what we 
often come back to is the importance of assuring oneself that the spending is lawful, responsible and defensible.  
Senator HUME:   But i f we  don't  then obviously there is significant personal liability that falls to the 
parliamentarian?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Spending which isn't consistent wouldn't be eligible , for example , for payments under the 
PBR Act. That's right.  
Senator HUME:   That's right. That falls to the parliamentarian . There is reputational ri sk, but there is more 
than that. It is much  greater than that. It is a significant personal liability if we behave in a way that is contrary to 
the act , that breaches the act . 
Mr Newnham:   Yes, there are consequences for the behaviour that flows from advice given under the act. I'm 
broadly agreeing with the premise of what you've been suggesting.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you. Secretary, what would be the outcome of a parliamentarian acting on advice that 
was provided by your department but was then later found to be in breach of the PBR Act? Would the 
parliamentarian still be liable?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Let me step back.  I'm not sure about your question of liability.  I think that's what Mr 
Newnham was saying. My understanding is t here's not a compliance framework which involves liability, as such, 
under the act . I'm happy to take the question on notice and explain in more detail what the compliance 
arrangements under the act are. We endeavour —I think we had this discussion at the last estimates —to provide 
advice which helps  members of parliament and their staff operate under the act.  
We have discussed the fact that, under some parts of the PBR framework, like travel expenses, there's an 
explicit safe harbour provision. There's not an explicit safe harbour provision across all of the rest of the PBR 
Act— 
Senator HUME:   No. 
Ms Wilkinson :  so we don't have that to work within. We try and provide advice to parliamentarians , to the 
best of our abilities , that is consistent  with what is in the act . I'm happy to take on notice the broader question of 
what would happen in a circumstance where advice was provided, a decision was taken and then our advice 
changed. But, at this stage, I'm not in a position to answer that in the general . 
Senator HUME:   Your own website says : 
If you contravene the dominant purpose test, value for money test or any conditions that apply to the provision of the public  
resource, including where the contravention occurs when your staff make arrangements on your behalf concerning resources 
you claim under the PBR Act:  
• your claim may be rejected or have to be repaid.  
• any amount not repaid within 28 days of an incorrect claim attracts a 25% penalty loading, and is a debt due to the 
Commonwealth, which may be recovered in court or set off against future amounts otherwise payable to you.  
So you can understand that there is a significant personal liability that is placed on the parliamentarian. A 
principles based framework , of course,  means that we are overly cautious in these circumstances and we seek 
advice from the department. If that advice from the department turned out, however, to be incorrect, there would 
be a significant liability for the parliamentarian.  
Mr Newnham :  Colleagues may wish to add to this. I would say , though , that, contextually, there would be a 
great deal of effort put into working closely with the lines of inquiry we might get from any parliamentarian or 
their staff to work through the particular circumstances that are on the table. So too —and whilst we're getting a bit 
into hypotheticals here —we'd need to take account of the types of exchanges that we've had with that 
parliamentarian in making our assessments down the track of the consequences of certain conduct. I'm keeping 
my answer high  level  intentionally . I can't give advice to the committee or drill into specifics , but I can say there 
is an attempt here to partner with parliamentarians and their offices in providing that guidance based on the facts 
and situations that are conveyed to our staff.  
Senator HUME:   Secretary, do you agree , then, that it's fundamentally important for the department's advice 
to be able to be trusted and to be based in a solid understanding of how the laws apply to be able to engender that 
trust?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 55 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Wilkinson :  Of course I agree. That's absolutely the case. But I also want to emphasise that we can't step 
away from the fact that it's a principles based framework where there is judgement involved  and w here, as Mr 
Newnham  said, the specifics  and the details of a particular case might change. We endeavour to work 
constructively with all parliamentarians through all of these issues. I'm not saying we always hit the mark, but we 
are genuinely and deeply committed to trying to assist parliamentarians in ensuring that they avoid the sort s of 
situations that you're outlining.  
Senator HUME:   We understand that —sorry, I'm speaking on behalf of my colleagues here. However, c ontext 
is one issue ; the law , how it applies and the interpretation of that law is another. I want to ask some questions in 
relation to the guidance  that was issued by the minister on 7 March  2025 . Did the department draft this advice? I 
have it here.  
Ms Frazer :  I think the guidance you're referring to is in relation to the new determinations that the minister 
put out on 20 February.  
Senator HUME:   Yes. 
Ms Frazer :  Yes, th e department drafted that guidance.  
Senator HUME:   When did the department first draft this advice?  
Ms Frazer :  It evolved over a period  of time . Drafting the determinations was one part of it, and then the next 
part of that process was to draft the guidance, so it was an ongoing process from the drafting of the  
determinations.  
Senator HUME:   So it's an iterative process.  
Ms Wilkinson :  It is an iterative process. The work on the determinations started, as I recall, in about October 
of last year, and the final determination was made in early February —I think it was early February, sorry. Correct 
me if I'm wrong, Mr Newnham.  
Mr Newnham :  The dates I've got for that are that the two fact sheets went out on 5 March and the ministerial 
circular on 7 March.  
Senator HUME:   What date was a draft first provided to the minister?  
Ms Wilkinson :  We'd have to take that on notice. We have worked closely with the minister and his office. We 
have been working closely since October around the determinations and the different ways in which more clarity 
could be  provided around the use of  the PBR framework , particularly during an election context, so we've been 
working iteratively with the minister and his office over that whole period.  
Senator HUME:   As part of those iterative workings, did the minister seek assurance that the advice had been 
supported by legal advice sought by the department?  
Ms Wilkinson :  We have discussed legal advice with the minister and his office as part of the process of 
drafting the determinations , yes. 
Senator HUME:   So yes?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Yes. 
Mr Newnham :  I can  certainly assure the committee there was legal advice during the course of that process. 
To the actual dates and where that advice fitted into the process, I'd have to take  that on notice.  
Senator HUME:   What legal advice was sought specifically, and who was it sought from?  
Mr Newnham :  I wouldn't go into the nature of the legal advice that was sought. I would say it was from the 
Australian Government Solicitor.  
Senator HUME:   The AGS?  
Mr Newnham :  Yes. 
Senator HUME:   You can't tell me what the advice from the AGS was?  
Mr Newnham :  I wouldn't speak to the nature of that legal advice at all.  
Senator HUME:   Why?  
Mr Newnham :  It's been a longstanding practice not to do that in a committee hearing. I would say it was an 
important feature of the process in arriving at those determinations, as was the work with the Special Minister of  
State and others.  
Senator HUME:   Did the minister's office provide feedback  on the draft guidance you provided?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 56 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Frazer :  Yes. As the secretary mentioned, it was an iterative process and so there was a lot of feedback 
provided and different  versions of — 
Senator HUME:   What was the nature of the feedback?  
Ms Frazer :  They were g eneral drafting adjustments.  
Senator HUME:   What  were they ? We're not talking spellcheck. What sorts of things did the minister give 
you feedback on?  
Ms Frazer :  All elements of the guidance.  
Senator HUME:   I'd like something a bit more specific than that , I think.  
Mr Newnham :  We can take that on notice. I don't know the answer to that. I don't know the answer to the 
specifics of the — 
Senator HUME:   So it was an iterative process that went back and forth  where t he minister's office gave you 
feedback , and you can't tell me what sort of feedback it was.  
Ms Frazer :  It was over drafting a guidance document, so there was feedback provided in a number of 
comments at each element of the guidance.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Some of the feedback was on some questions that could be covered in the FAQs and what 
some of the questions that could be answered were. It was a little bit about the scope of the advice. I  think i t's 
clear that we rely heavily on the Special Minister of State's staff. They , obviously , bring a parliamentary 
perspective to the drafting. As I said, this is guidance material; it's not another set of legal documents . It's material 
which is designed to try and assist in the understanding of the application of the new determinations, and to try 
and assist  where possible  around the ways in which you can move from a principles based framework to help 
inform a decision about a — 
Senator HUME:   Did the minister's office ask for legal advice  specifically or did they ask to see the legal 
advice that you had requested ? 
Ms Wilkinson :  We can take that on notice. It would be normal practice in most of the work that I have done 
with ministers' offices —whether it's the Special Minister of State , the finance minister or the Treasurer —to share 
legal advice, particularly in relation to amendments that are being  made to legislation.  
Senator HUME:   The legal advice that you have received or sought from AGS, specifically, on this issue 
applies to all of us in this room. Is there a real reason why you can't share that , other than  to say,  'It's unusual for 
us to share legal advice '? If it applies to us, why would you not be able to share that?  
Mr Newnham :  I have said we can take that on notice, but I would note the long -standing practice of not 
providing details of legal advice to committees, and successive committees have taken that approach. What I can 
say is, if I may, circling back to something you said a moment ago, we are very seized of the close interest in the 
application of the determinations —both PBR and MOP (S). We very much acknowledge the high importance of 
equipping parliamentarians and their staff with the best guidance, including clarity. We are seized of  the urgency. 
We continue to work very closely, and have for some months now, with the Special Minister of State  and, t o drill 
into that, are seeking to assist in various forums —guidance tools and helpdesk support . We are consciou s of the 
considerable outreach by the Special Minister of State and his office across parliament as well.  
Senator HUME:   Minister, would you be comfortable with the department sharing that legal advice?  
Senator Farrell:   I'll give that some consideration ; I'm not sure what the usual practice is . I am a convention 
sort of person and if it 's not normal convention to release that sort of information —I would have thought that over 
the length of time that these discussions have been going on, the legal advice would be different , depending on 
where you eventually land in terms of the direction that you  want to go.  So, in one sense, I'm not sure that, say, 
legal advice from six months ago on a different set of facts would be all that handy.  
I am a minister that likes  transparency, as you know —we worked very closely together to get transparent 
electoral laws —but, again, if it 's not customer practice to release that information, perhaps there is another way to 
go. But I will give  it some active consideration , and I will try and come back to you during the course of the day.  
Senator HUME:   That would be great. I'm conscious , Minister,  that everybody around this table, all of our 
colleagues , you and I are liable for an activity that is being governed by legal advice that we 're not allowed to see. 
So w e may have been breach because we haven't been provided with that legal advice.  
Senator Farrell:   You can trust me, Senator, because I will make sure that the advice that I give reflects the 
legal advice that none of my colleagues, none of your colleagues and none of the rest of the members of Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 57 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  parliament find themselves in difficulty. Going back to an issue you raised, most of the advice that 's given would 
come from IPIA  and m y recollection is — 
Senator HUME:   That's on travel . 
Senator Farrell:   Yes. 
Senator HUME:   We are beyond that.  
Senator Farrell:   I understand that . But I would  have thought most questions that most members of parliament 
ask are in relation to all of the things that IP EA covers , and, of course, you are entitled to rely on advice that you 
get from IPEA . I appreciate the circumstances are different here , that the same protection s don't  apply , but if you  
could  give me a chance to have a look at that question  I will respond to you as quickly as I can.  
Senator HUME:   Yes. I'm conscious that IPEA  will be appearing later —or perhaps  they won't be —but it 's not 
IPEA  that we're talking about here. I know where you 're going , but obviously the P BR Act is very different.  
Senator Farrell:   I appreciate the distinction between the two but I'm simply saying  that, I would have 
thought , most of the queries that MPs make would be queries  that they make to IPEA  on the range of —to the 
extent that they get advice from IPEA  and rely on that  advice, then there are some protections. That's the only 
observation I make.  
Senator HUME:   Yes. We did delay much of the P BR Act moving to IPEA  through legislation only  
yesterday , so we 've still got another year before that applies and another election.  
Senator Farrell:   You mean one more election  beyond the one that — 
Senator HUME:   An election , I should say .  
Senator Farrell:   Yes, n ot another. An election.  
Senator HUME:   It feels like only yesterday. Secretary, it's correct to say that those who use the services of 
the department to ensure that they comply with the law and are trying to do the right thing by doing so  need  that 
guidance that you provide to be correct . Correct?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Absolutely.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you.  
Ms Wilkinson :  We try very hard to provide the best possible advice to parliamentarians when they come 
forward with queries and questions , including advice about different ways of mitigating , perhaps,  some of the 
risks that could come forward . But we can only do that in the context of a piece of legislation that is principles 
based and  that, therefore , unavoidably require s some judgement.  
Senator HUME:   But b ecause of the circumstances that we find ourselves in, if it turned out that the 
department's interpretation of its own act s was wrong, that would significantly diminish the standing of the 
department . It would  make the purpose of the department providing that guidance somewhat redundant. Yes?  
Ms Wilkinson :  It would be problematic, yes.  
Senator HUME:   Are you aware of any legal advice that contradicts the department 's opinion on the 
application of the law?  
Ms Wilkinson :  I'm not aware of any advice that contradicts the department's application , no.  
Senator HUME:   Are you aware of any parliamentarian s seeking independent legal advice on the department 's 
interpretation of the acts?  
Ms Wilkinson :  No, I'm not.  
Senator HUME:   If that had occurred and the department decided to prosecute  a parliamentarian for a breach 
of the P BR but the parliamentarian contested th at breach on the basis of their own independent legal advice, aside 
from that somewhat embarrassing display of a lack of faith in the department, what would occur?  
Ms Wilkinson :  That feels like a very hypothetical situation. It's very hard for me to answer.  
Senator HUME:   It may be hypothetical but I'm not entirely  sure how hypothetical it is. Minister, a re you 
aware of any parliamentarians seeking their own advice due to a concern that the department's interpretation of 
the law is incorrect?  
Senator Farrell:   I've just  asked my staff , and the answer appears to be no , but if that 's not the correct answer I 
will come back to you asap.  
Senator HUME:   Yes, if you could come back to me asap. 
Senator Farrell:   Are you aware of any such case?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 58 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   I have heard, yes, that that may be the case. The guidance that was published by the 
department o n 7 March , has the department received any feedback on it?  
Ms Frazer :  Yes, we have.  
Senator HUME:   From parliamentarians directly?  
Ms Frazer :  From your office and from representatives from the Leader of the Opposition's office and through  
the Special Minister of State's office.  
Senator HUME:   So from both  the government and the opposition , you've had some feedback .  
Ms Frazer :  Yes. 
Senator HUME:   Would you say  that the feedback 's positive?  
Ms Frazer :  I'd say  that the feedback is seeking to understand and be very clear , what the guidance means and 
how to act on that.  
Senator HUME:   In the guidance it states that it's not permissible to use public resources to provide 
instructions on how to complete a ballot paper. That's correct?  
Ms Frazer :  I don't have it in front of me, but I trust your — 
Senator HUME:   In this instance —and I know I am correct here —I can't claim the cost of printing how -to-
vote cards for my own re -election . That's correct?  
Ms Frazer :  Yes.  
Senator HUME:   We all agree that is entirely appropriate. But the guidance also suggests that all public 
resources can't be used to instruct someone on how to complete a ballot paper . Now, I'm paid by the taxpayer , so 
am I considered a 'public resource '? 
Mr Newnham :  Sorry, I missed the last bit of your question, apologies.  
Senator HUME:   Am I a 'public resource'? I'm paid for by the taxpayer . The guidance suggests that all public 
resources can 't be used to instruct someone how to vote . It would be crazy if I could n't instruct someone how to 
vote, wouldn't it?  
Mr Newnham :  Yes— 
Ms Wilkinson :  That's not the intention. The context for this guidance is assisting parliamentarians and their 
staff specifically with interpreting the determinations and how that all works with the PBR Act.  
Senator HUME:   So what is the definition of a public resource?  
Mr Newnham :  I'll defer to colleagues, but if it will be of use I can certainly speak to the nature of that 
guidance.  
Senator HUME:   No, I just want an answer to  the question.  
Mr Newnham :  Okay.  
Ms Bruce :  I'm not sure what part of the guidance you were specifically referring to , but in part of the 
guidance we seek to set out that it 's the responsibility of parliamentarians to ensure that directions to MOP(S)  Act 
employees are reasonable, lawful and defensible , as MOP(S)  Act employees are Commonwealth employees . I 
think what we would highlight is that even though MOP(S)  Act employees are not APS employees —so they're 
not Australian Public Service employees ; they're employed under a different employment framework —they are 
Commonwealth employees.  
Senator HUME:   So are they a public resource in your interpretation , Ms Bruce ? 
Ms Bruce :  We've not defined 'public resource' in this guidance. I think that is intended to assist 
parliamentarians , as part of a principles  based framework , to think about both PBR  Act resources that have been 
spoken and, I suppose, the time of MOP(S) Act employees , given they're  Commonwealth  employees.  
Senator HUME:   So if I'm not a public resource , are staff a public resource?  
Mr Newnham :  Under the PB R, the definition of 'public resource ' has two components . The first is : 
… any expenses or allowances paid under Part 3 — 
and the second part is:  
… goods, services, premises, equipment or any other facility provided or paid for under that Part.  
So that wouldn't include — Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 59 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Right . So it doesn't include anybody that's employed under the MOP(S) Act , because the 
MOP(S) Act  is what determines use of staff  and manages staff —that's their framework?  
Mr Newnham :  That's right.  
Senator HUME:   And the PBR Act doesn't include the use of staff.  
Mr Newnham :  And I can add to that. The PBR Act doesn't regulate how a MOP(S) Act employee may  be 
directed and it doesn't  govern their employment . It does provide a framework to assist a parliamentarian to 
consider what 's reasonable and defensible.  
Senator HUME:   Because staff aren't paid under part 3. Is that right? That means that they are not considered 
a public resource.  
Mr Newnham :  That's my understanding. I'll just check.  
Ms Bruce :  That's c orrect.  
Ms Wilkinson :  I think we just need to be a bit careful here. They're not considered a 'public resource ' under 
part 3 of the PBR Act , but the salaries of MOP(S) Act staff are, of course, paid for from public resourcing. I think 
that there 's obviously a distinction between what 's covered under the PBR Act and the broader question of  who 
pays for MOP(S) Act  staff. The MOP (S) Act itself makes it clear that the reason it is reasonable to pay for 
MOP(S) Act  staff is to  assist members of parliament conduct their parliamentary duties.  That's right.  
Senator HUME:   Let's just say I ask my staff to work in their taxpayer funded time on a speech, for instance, 
about the importance of completing a formal ballot or a speech where I ask people to vote for me. Can they do 
that?  
Ms Wilkinson :  This is where it's very difficult to have this discussion around the specifics when we're 
working under a principles based framework. It  is a judgement that parliamentarians need to make as to whether  
it's reasonable to use your staff in different contexts. This is one of the inherent challenges . The  alternative of 
being very specific about what activities are allowed or not  allowed create s a whole lot of bright lines , which  can 
then create issues in itself . So it is — 
Senator HUME:   When we get confusing, conflicting and different information in guidelines that are very 
different from conventions that have been used in the past, even though the act hasn't changed, you can 
understand why it would cause consternation among parliamentarians who, let's face it, live in a heightened 
political state during an election campaign . They are trying to do the right thing but  aren't quite sure about how to 
go about doing that. The department seems to be not just unhelpful in this matter but almost obstructive.  
Ms Wilkinson :  We are definitely trying to not be obstructive , but it is unavoidably the case that in a principles 
based framework there are judgements that have to be made and it is challenging to make those. There are some 
elements of it  in the PBR regulations , for example , which very clearly specif y what is and  what is  not allowed. 
There are other things that are much less clear. The new determination that the minister has made has provided , if 
you like , the positive determination around the sorts of activities that comprise parliamentary duties, party 
political  duties , electorate duties  and other duties.  That's what that framework has done.  
Senator HUME:   I know you're very reluctant to speak about specifics and hypotheticals, but you can 
understand the circumstance whereby, because you're unwilling to do that, senators or members of the House of 
Reps might go and seek legal advice themselves because they  are so concerned that they are not getting answers 
that they need . The guidelines are confusing  and different from convention. Ms Bruce , could you provide me with 
your understanding of your specific role in the division?  
Ms Bruce :  In terms of the functions?  
Senator HUME:   What's your purview?  
Ms Bruce :  I'd describe my role as having  two components. One is administering, if that's the right term , the 
Members of Parliament (Staff) Act , the MOP(S) Act . As for t he other , we have within Ministerial and 
Parliamentary Services a pay and conditions function. So that's effectively a payroll team that processes contracts 
et cetera.  
Senator HUME:   It's the human resources framework? That's your — 
Ms Bruce :  That's right, so sitting over the  human resources framework. I'd add that, in my role , I work very 
closely with the Parliamentary Workplace Support Service. As you know , from October 2023, a number of 
functions transferred to the PWSS. I think it's fair to say that my role prior to that MOG had both the framework 
and the entire operational support , and now  we work together with PWSS on some functions that have transferred 
to them.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 60 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Does your role extend to providing advice on the PBR Act?  
Ms Bruce :  I would say I work very closely with colleagues with in MAPS because there's often a crossover in 
inquiries.  We have a no -wrong -door policy. I might get an inquiry, for example, that has an HR component and 
that has a travel or a PBR component. It doesn't matter whether it's within MAPS or with a colleague in IPEA  or 
the PWSS. We endeavour to provide as holistic advice as we can and to be as helpful as we can, whether it's to 
parliamentarians or to MOP(S)  Act employees.  
Senator HUME:   But it's Ms Bektas that is really responsible for managing the team that provides the advice 
on the non -travel -related PBR  resources —printing , communications and that sort of thing.  
Ms Bruce :  Yes, that's correct.  
Senator HUME:   Ms Bruce, your role is managing those human resources frameworks. You engage with —I'm 
trying to remember the names of them —the MOP(S) Act  employee representative groups.  
Ms Bruce :  The Employee Consultative Group ? That's correct, yes.  
Senator HUME:   You facilitate those meetings and you provide  advice to them on changes in policy?  
Ms Bruce :  That's right. The group has a work program . I work with that group either during the bargaining 
process proper , which concluded late last year , or—now that bargaining has concluded, we're working through a 
suite of policy changes that follow the  enterprise agreement  being updated.  
Senator HUME:   You contributed to the guidance that was developed for the minister on  the changes to 
parliamentary business ; is that correct?  
Ms Frazer :  As the area responsible. Senior managers were involved , yes.  
Senator HUME:   What was the contribution that Ms Bruce made to th at guidance?  
Ms Frazer :  I don't think it delineates as neatly as you're asking.  
Senator HUME:   Did it involve matters relating to the PBR Act? 
Ms Frazer :  No. It related to the guidance as a whole , but the area of expertise in relation to the PBR is Ms 
Bektas's  area.  
Senator HUME:   Have there been any meetings, Ms Bruce, of the Employee Consultative Group  or the work  
health and safety committee since th at guidance was issued on 7 March?  
Ms Bruce :  I can't speak to the work health and safety committee, because that's now  been  transferred to the 
PWSS. There have been meetings ; I'm not sure if I have the exact dates in front of me. We have had three 
meetings . I think it was  the 6th, the 13th and —I'd have to check my phone . I think there was one in the following 
week. We've had a number of meetings recently to get through, as I said, the program of work to review policies 
that are currently being consulted on.  
Senator HUME:   At any of those meetings, did you provide advice that staff were now captured as part of the 
PBR framework?  
Ms Bruce :  To the best of my recollection, no.  
Senator HUME:   Are you certain about that?  
Ms Bruce :  As I've just said, to the best of my recollection.  
Senator HUME:   Your understanding , then, is that staff are not captured as part of the PBR framework?  
Ms Bruce :  I think , as Mr Newnham highlighted earlier, the PBR framework can't govern MOP(S) Act  
employee time. The guidance is provided to provide a framework to assist  parliamentarians to think through what 
might be reasonable in terms of how to direct employees.  
Senator HUME:   Minister, is it the view of the government that staff are captured under the PBR Act or the 
MOP(S) Act? 
Senator Farrell:   Staff are cap tured under the MOP(S) Act . Can I, while I've got the call, respond to one of 
your earlier questions. Due to the nature of legal privilege and convention, legal advice should not be shared in 
this forum. However, I will undertake to find a forum or process by which this advice can be shared . With respect 
to the other question you asked, we're not aware  of parliamentarians seeking independent legal advice.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you, Minister. The Prime Minister  is rumoured to be calling an election within 24 
hours — 
Senator Farrell:   You don't want to believe rumours.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 61 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   You don't want to believe anything on Twitter.  Can I have a guarantee from you that you 
will amend the regulations to address the confusion that has been caused by this guidance?  
Senator Farrell:   You have a guarantee from me , Senator Hume,  that I will do everything I can to make sure 
that everybody who's engaged in this parliamentary process —irrespective of which political party they come 
from —gets absolutely the best possible advice that they can be given so that nobody finds themselves in a 
situation where they are embarrassed or worse as a result of either following advice that we've given them or, as 
the case may be, not following advice.  
Senator HUME:   That is a 'yes', when I ask the question —that you  will amend the regulations to address the 
confusion that has been caused by the guidance ? 
Senator Farrell:   No. With respect, Senator Hume, you're putting words into my mouth.  
Senator HUME:   No. You're just putting different words into your mouth. There's a difference.  
Senator Farrell:   You've got to listen to the words I'm putting into my mouth.  
CHAIR:   You cannot put words in each other's mouths.  
Senator Farrell:   No. What I said is what I mean. I will ensure that, to the best of my ability, the advice that 
we give —whether it's to members of parliament or whether it's to their staff —is absolutely the best advice that we 
can provide them. That's why we've spent so much time on this process. If it was easy, somebody else would have 
done it, Senator Hume. It's not easy, and the officials here have been working day and night to try and come up 
with the best possible advice.  
Sometimes , in this area there , is conflicting advice that can potentially come up. As the minister in charge of 
this area, we've got to resolve those conflicts. But can I assure you that I will do everything I can to make sure 
that all of the people who engage in this election process have got the right advice so that nobody ends up in any 
difficulty, either because they have followed or have not followed that advice.  
Senator HUME:   Minister, I didn't feel that I'd need to say this but, obviously, it's necessary. I have a written 
guarantee from you, in the form of a letter, that you will change these regulations. I just want that on the record.  
Senator Farrell:   You can rely on anything I give you in writing , Senator Hume . Does that answer your 
question?  
Senator HUME:   Thank you. Secretary, can I seek an assurance from you that you will assist the minister, in 
whatever  way he needs, to achieve the commitment that he has made to me in writing that these regulations will 
be changed.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Of course . I will assist the minister to carry out his priorities.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you. Secretary —and Minister, obviously —I think it's probably worth putting on the 
record that, should we not be able to complete this before the election is called, can I also confirm from both of 
you that there is no barrier to it being done during caretaker provisions?  
Senator Farrell:   Caretaker provisions, of course —the fundamental aspect of the caretaker convention is that 
the government doesn't act independently during the course of the election and that, if things need to be done in 
that period of time, it would work with the opposition and the consent of the opposition. So  it goes without saying 
that, in those circumstances and with your cooperation, we would do exactly that and — 
Senator HUME:   I can assume there would be full -throated consent from both the government and the 
opposition.  
Senator Farrell:   I like to work with everybody in the parliament. We did that with the electoral reform, you 
might recall. We'll continue to do that in this space. If there is a necessity to do anything in conjunction during 
this period, which one imagines there will be, of course it'll be done in cooperation with the opposition.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you, Minister. I have just o ne more question, and it's a  very easy one for you . In 
previous hearings — 
Senator Farrell:   For me, did you say?  
Senator HUME:   For you, y es. You provided confirmation that the government had a staffing committee and 
you confirmed its membership for me. Could I ask you to confirm that the membership has not changed?  
Senator Farrell:   No, the membership has not changed , and we had a meeting only a couple of hours ago.  
Senator HUME:   Excellent. So y ou can confirm for me , then, that  the membership of this government staff 
committee includes the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister for Finance, you as the Special Minister of State, the Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 62 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Prime Minister's chief of staff, the chief of staff to the Leader of the Government in the Senate , and the chief of 
staff to you, Special Minister of State . 
Senator Farrell:   Yes. 
Senator HUME:   Is there any one else that is on that government staffing committee?  
Senator Farrell:   No.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you.  
CHAIR:   Are there any further coalition senators who wish to ask questions  here? As there are none, w e have 
released IP EA and , therefore , it's now time to call on the Australian Electoral Commission. Thank you to the 
Department of Finance. I will see some of you tonight.  
Senator HUME:   While we're waiting for the AEC, M inister, can I ask , off the top of your head , are there any 
significant changes to the staffing table that you're  aware of?  
Senator Farrell:   Not since the last estimates, which was only a few weeks ago, as I recall.  
Australian Electoral Commission  
[15:17]  
CHAIR:   Good afternoon to the Australian Electoral Commission. I'd like to welcome Mr Jeff Pope, our acting 
Electoral Commissioner , and  other officers of the AEC. Mr Pope, d o you wish to make an opening statement?  
Mr Pope :  Thank you, Chair. Today I actually would, if I could, please.  The Australian Electoral Commission 
stands ready to deliver an election at any time  a writ  is issued. The AEC began preparing for this federal election 
as soon as the last federal election concluded and continued preparation alongside the delivery of by -elections for 
redistributions and the referendum. Everything is locked and loaded and absolutely ready to go. I note the public 
commentary following the Western Australian state election. I am not in a position to provide insights or 
comments on the public commentary but I would like to give you and all Australians assurance of our 
preparations.  
To prepare for a federal election, the AEC  undertake s a rigorous forecasting process to ensure that polling 
places are appropriately staffed and have the right number of materials and ballot papers. This formula -driven 
forecasting method has been refined over a long period of time and is informed by historic voting patterns, 
population changes, queuing data and research and local information. These forecasts are adjusted with increase s 
in voters on the electoral roll and when redistributed electoral boundaries are implemented.  
During the election , the AEC closely monitors voting patterns as it 's not always possible to accurately predict 
the exact number of voters at each location. We look at the votes issued every day at pre -poll voting centres , 
during the early voting period , and how that correlates with our forecast s. We make adjustments to staffing levels, 
the number of issuing points open and ballot paper stock as needed. We also closely monitor postal votes issued 
for every division every day. These are essential daily assurance tasks that help collaborate or pivot  our service 
delivery, where we can also draw on our contingency plans of additional staff or materials if needed.  
At this election, our service delivery and monitoring will be further enhanced through the expanded use of 
electronic certified lists.  We will have about 13,000 ECLs deployed at all of our 580 -odd prepoll voting centres, 
over 500 mobile teams across Australia , and declaration issuing points  in Western Australia, Victoria and New 
South Wales, where,  due to the recent redistributions, there is a potential for a high number of voters attending 
polling places outside of their division.  
I should note, however, that , despite our very best efforts in planning, preparation and delivery, it won't be 
absolutely perfect at every polling place. We are planning on servicing up to 18 million Australians in 12 days, 
who can theoretically vote anywhere  at more than 8,000 locations all around Australia and in over 100 countries. 
Post election, we expect to be counting more than 226 million preferences from a potential 36 million ballot 
papers for both the House of Representatives and the Senate. It is a huge service undertaking in a very short 
period of time that we will deliver to the very best of our ability.  
There will be some queues, but our data indicates that the vast majority of voters get in and out of polling 
places in less than 15 minutes. To assist, we ask that voters plan their vote and try their best to avoid peak times, 
such as the last day of early voting or the first thing in the morning on polling day.  
Of course, all of this can't be done without our 100,000 -strong AEC temporary workforce. These are special 
people from all walks of life across Australia who, like our permanent workforce, are absolutely committed to 
delivering the best possible election with the highest levels of service and integrity for their fellow Australians. As 
you would understand, for the AEC to ensure high levels of service delivery, our workforce sourcing model Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 63 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  includes multiple strategies and layers of contingency. The AEC directly recruits, trains and pays a very large 
majority of our 100,000 temporary election workers and accesses a small top -up component that are engaged 
through various labour hire agencies using Commonwealth procurement panel arrangements. This model has 
proven to be successful.  
All temporary election workers, regardless of how they are recruited, receive training designed and delivered 
by the AEC for their polling and non -polling roles. The training is tailored to each role, depending on the level of 
responsibility and complexity, and includes a mix of online training, instructor -led training, training videos and 
election procedure handbooks.  
Administering elections is an increasingly complex undertaking. As well as taking every effort in our 
preparation and planning, we remain agile to respond to changes in our operating environment during the election 
period. Australian voters should be confident in our preparations to deliver a federal election with the highest 
levels of service standards and integrity.  
CHAIR:   Thank you, Mr Pope . I'm going to start with a quick question myself. When you say that you forecast 
ballot papers —I'm of course  a West ern Australian Senator —you forecast the number of voters and therefore the 
number of ballot papers. I 'm presuming , then, you would already  know whether the number of ballot papers you 
plan to issue to Western Australian polling booths, noting that many of them are  at the same location s as for the 
state election , is greater than the number of votes taken at that booth on election day at the state election . In some 
cases, though, where they ran out of ballot papers, have you got any knowledge of which  ones they were so you 
can double -check that ? 
Mr Pope :  I might start with the last point first. We have absolutely done analysis based on what we've  heard , 
largely through media reporting in Western Australia , with respect to where they ran out of ballot papers. And we 
have overlaid our own prepoll voting service offering and our polling places  with what we understand the 
Western Australian Electoral Commission have also  delivered . There are some differences : where  they didn't 
have some prepoll voting centres, we do ; and where they had one , we have two. So we're very confident in our 
polling place service offering in terms of meeting the service expectations of WA electors . 
And, y es, to your opening point, we have also gone through and done another layer of assurance of what we 
had already put in place with respect to our own forecasting and staffing levels and materials based on the 2022 
election , the 2023 referendum and the WA state election. Again, w e are also confident that our forecasting has got 
us in good shape to deliver a really good election to Western Australian voters.  
CHAIR:   Can I also ask with respect to remote polling and in particular for Aboriginal and Torres Strait  
Islander communities in remote locations . The advertised times , in terms of a schedule , of course , haven't come 
out yet because  the election hasn't  been called , but I'm presuming that that's all stepped through and pre-planned  
for the amount of time the AEC will be on the ground.  
Mr Pope :  Broadly, yes. Obviously, w e're waiting for the election timetable to be announced . Going back to 
my point about agility, weather is a big factor in servicing remote parts of Australia . I note that I was in Darwin 
and Alice Springs a few weeks ago and they were talking about the 'non-soon '—now it seems to be a late 
monsoon —and the weather events that are  occurring from the Kimberley all the way across to Cape York and 
down into Central Queensland and western Queensland at the moment. All that may have some sort of an impact 
on our schedule , so we need to remain very agile , and we will do our very best to communicate to communities 
firstly  our schedule and secondly any unfortunate changes that might occur.  
CHAIR:   I presume that will mean that you'll make  a commitment to spending the amount of time in each 
community that you've  informed them that you will . I think there were issues in Western Australia where the WA 
Electoral Commission stayed for  half an hour when they were supposed to be on the ground for two  hours and 
that kind of thing.  
Mr Pope :  I can't guarantee it, but we will do our very best . The reason I can't guarantee it is that it may come 
down to logistical things such as charter flights.  
CHAIR:   I understand if you might arrive late, but y ou don't really want to see the AEC leaving early.  
Mr Pope :  No. We will do our absolute best. I might say that , noting the caveat I put in around the weather and 
the complexity —and, unlike  the referendum , when remote voting services were done over three weeks , this is 
now back to a two -week period —we are intending to offer our largest  remote voter service in this  two-week 
period tha t we've ever done before . That is our intention . That is what we are planning to try and achieve , and we 
will do everything we feasibly and possibly can to try and deliver that.  
CHAIR:   Historically , it's always been the case that if you ha d an elderly or infirm person in a remote 
community that can't walk to the polling booth, which is quite common, the AEC would be able to go around to Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 64 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  their house —it's literally like walking around the corner —and collect their vote, essentially treating the whole 
community as the polling place in that context . I think at  a previous estimates the AEC said , 'We don't do that. ' In 
fact, I've done it, I've seen it happen and I've been there when it has happened on many, many occasions , and, yes, 
it was done in accordance with the idea that the whole community is the polling place . So I want to seek some 
clarification from you on that, noting in particular that with postal vote s there's no guarantee someone's vote —it 
gets issued and sent back —would be returned in time.  
Mr Pope :  Postal voting is a restriction that we're  alert to. I understand what may have occurred in the past and 
your experiences with respect to that. But that is not the practice that we 're able to implement , and we shouldn't be 
implementing it in recent elections , and we certainly won't be able to implement it in this election. 'Polling  place ' 
has a very clear definition under the legislation , and there are things that need to occur at and around the polling 
place, like signage and scrutin eers and party workers and our staff et cetera. What we would be encouraging 
people to do in those circumstances is seek assistance from community members, community organisations, 
whatever you possibly can to try to have that level of assistance to assist people.  I understand the challenge that 
you're outlining, but there is a legislative challenge here also.  
CHAIR:   What is the legislative challenge , specifically , in terms of the definition of a polling place? When 
you mention ed the conditions attached to polling, those conditions have certainly been upheld , and there was  
nothing improper when those votes were taken. It depended , in large part , about the number of AEC staff that had 
been sent to each location in terms of their capacity to do that as part of their visit to a community.  
Mr Pope :  It comes down to our need to actually gazette the location of a polling place . With a polling place, 
there's a 6 -metre rule with  the entrance to the polling place in terms of signage and party workers  et cetera .  
CHAIR:   You can come out to a car park and take someone's vote.  
Mr Pope :  At a polling place, y es.  
CHAIR:   Why is this different —if someone lives just around the corner  and can't walk there?  
Mr Pope :  It sounds to me , then,  like the polling place is  roaming the community but — 
CHAIR:   Yes, but I've seen the AEC move the gazetted point . It changes the advertised polling place from one 
building to another , so I don't really understand why this would — 
Mr Pope :  Right. That  requires us to go through a process and then advertise that on our website.  
CHAIR:   No. It's been done on the day because the original place wasn't free , hadn't been booked properly  or 
wasn't suitable. I've seen that happen a number of times.  
Mr Pope :  I don't dispute that in any way. But it is not within our legislation and our procedures as to how 
we're instructing staff to deliver remote voter services —or any other  voter services  for that matter.  
CHAIR:   We'll go to the coalition.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   I've got a few questions with regard to some of the conduct during elections 
in the Northern Territory. Can the AEC confirm whether you 've received any prior complaints regarding vote 
buying, voter intimidation and disinformation  in the Northern Territory?  
Mr Pope :  As in s pecific complaints with respect to those? Not that I'm aware of. Are you talking with respect 
to the referendum  or the last election or both?  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   Both.  
Mr Pope :  I'd have to take that on notice to come back to you with any degre e of specificity.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   How does the AEC begin to address misleading and deceptive conduct?  
Mr Pope :  Misleading and deceptive conduct is a criminal offence under section 329 of the Electoral A ct. It 
can start taking effect during a writ period but more so once voting starts. The court cases that have been heard 
with respect to misleading and deceptive communication relate specifically , now, to communication around 
actually how to complete a ballot paper. So , if there is communication that effectively says the only way to vote is 
to place 1 against this particular candidate, then that may well constitute misleading and deceptive conduct. It 
would  be a criminal offence where  we would then gather information and take steps to try and address that issue 
but also potentially be referring that matter through to the Australian Federal Police.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   Does that also relate to  voters given directive  aside from just putting 1—
giving direction on how to vote?  
Mr Pope :  It'll depend on the circumstances. What you're also describing there could sound to be a bit like a 
how-to-vote card.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 65 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   I guess , in the Northern Territory, where we 've got particularly vulnerable 
individuals —some whose first language is not English —when they're provided assistance, there is some concern 
that that assistance being provided to them might be in the form of directing them how to vote.  
Mr Pope :  Yes, and to try to address some of that, Senator, we're doing a number of things. We're doing 
widespread community education sessions right across Indigenous communities. If I can just refer to my notes , 
we've now delivered 308 education sessions around election processes, such as enrolling and voting and how to 
cast a formal vote , to First Nations  communities. We are running our Stop and Consider campaign nationally , 
which is also informing and educating all Australians on how to stop and consider the source of information that 
you're receiving and hearing. Particularly  with remote voter services, we will have tablets with each of our remote 
voter service teams that ha ve videos in language —I think it's up to 12 languages , if my memory serves me 
correctly . As people are entering the polling place or the polling venue , these videos advise people in language 
about how to  complete a ballot paper properly , obviously without any reference at all to parties or candidates. It 's 
just, 'Here's how to cast a formal vote for both the House and the Senate. ' 
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   Those 300 sessions that you have delivered, when were they delivered?  
Mr Pope :  Recently , and they're still going. And they will continue up to the polling period.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   Just to be clear, those videos provided in language, is that the process? Are 
those voters provided that video , or are they talked through  it by a community member who may be volunteering 
on the day?  
Mr Pope :  The education sessions are delivered either by us, by our community electoral participation officers 
who are Indigenous people we employ in community who speak in language , or sometimes by our 70 -odd 
Indigenous partner organisations. We are in a contractual arrangement with them to deliver that support and 
assistance . They also obviously agree and sign up to our strict impartiality requirements as a part of that.  
The video itself is just playing on a reel out the front of the polling venue. So as you're waiting to go into the 
polling place, you can stand there and you can watch the video before you enter the polling place. And then , of 
course , inside the polling place or polling venue you have AEC staff who are also able to provide assistance to 
people about how to complete a formal vote.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   And how does the AEC ensure that staff aren't biased and are impartial 
when on duty —especially those who are language speakers? I would assume that AEC staff who don't necessarily 
speak the language could particularly understand what is said at all times . 
Mr Pope :  Yes, Senator , and that could be potential ly the same with those who speak foreign languages as 
well. But we have very strict impar tiality requirements and conditions that people sign up to as a condition of 
their employment , and we compl ement that with a lot of training. We take that incredibly seriously. If we had any 
complaints with respect to any staff and concerns around impartiality  then we would investigate that.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   If someone is found to be acting inappropriately in that manner and 
directing voters how to vote within their own language, if they're found to be doing that, would they be dismissed 
if the investigation has found  that that's what happening ? 
Mr Pope :  Yes. That's right. If we did an investigation and found evidence to that effect, then , yes—and 
swiftly.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   What evidence is required if, for example, someone is asking , 'Are  you 
going to pay us to vote today, ' or suggestions of bribery and those sorts of things? What sort of substantial 
evidence is required to actually bring that to your attention if it's occurring deceitfully?  
Mr Pope :  I'd suggest  that probably from the outset  that, from our perspective , it would need  multiple 
corroborative versions from different people. More than one complaint would be helpful. One complaint might 
well get us interested and focused , but certainly corroborative information from multiple people would be more 
substantial . 
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   Okay, so as long as it's corroborated, there's no need for photographic or 
video evidence. I mean that would obviously help, but it can come down to corroborated evidence by more than 
one person.  
Mr Pope :  That would be useful.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   So, intimidation, offering money or cigarettes in exchange for votes, using a 
minister's car to transport individuals —are any of these actions acceptable?  
Mr Pope :  I'm not aware of any of those actions to start with, Senator, but all of those could give rise to 
concern.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 66 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   Surely helping an elector  get to a polling booth wouldn't be frowned upon?  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   Using a minister's car to transport individuals?  
CHAIR:   We've just discussed the difficulty of getting to polling booths and that community should lend their 
resources to help people in remote communities get to a polling place. That's really all I'm saying.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   I'm asking the AEC of the level of acceptability.  
Mr Pope :  And I've heard of community buses and other members of the community using their cars . 
Certainly,  our preference very much would be that there is impartiality around that support and assistance to 
voters. I think the perception of otherwise would be difficult.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   Is it acceptable for the heads of statutory authorities to actively participate 
in frontline campaigning?  
Mr Pope :  I'm not exactly sure of the circumstances that you might be referring to, Senator , and it may well 
come down to the circumstances, the authority and what sort of campaigning they're doing. But it's not something 
that I think the AEC has a role in regulating.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   Okay. Just to be clear, a corroboration of two or more people will initiate an 
investigation.  
Mr Pope :  That would be helpful  in pointing us in the direction of where we'd need to make more inquiries and 
focus in on a particular complaint. Yes.  
Senator NAMPIJINPA PRICE:   Thank you.  
Senator HUME:   Chair, I have some more questions , if that's alright.  
CHAIR:   Senator Hume.  
Senator HUME:   Mr Pope, I wrote to you on 13 March about an organisation called the Vida Fund . It's a 
fundraising vehicle fronted by a woman named Hannah Ferguson . I raised with you that, according to reports in 
the Financial Review , the fund had raised over $100,000 and it was specifically established to provide funds to 
candidates for the federal election. You would agree that this is a case of a company that needed to register  as a 
significant third party but had failed to do so —yes? 
Mr Pope :  And I believe they have now, Senator.  
Senator HUME:   Yes. You wrote to me on 21 March to confirm that, following that letter, the Vida F und had 
now registered  with the AEC , and that's terrific. They registered on 18 March, so five days after my original 
correspondence with you. And while it's now registered before that 90 -day period, if it hadn't done that  it would 
have created an entirely separate breach of the law. My understanding is this doesn't yet resolve the issue of their 
prior illegal fundraising. Because of its failure to register with the AEC before raising funds  of more than the 
disclosure threshold of $16,900 the fund is essentially liable for a civil penalty of up to $250,000. Is that right?  
Mr Pope :  My understanding  is that under section 287F  the entity must be registered before the end of 90 days 
after becoming required to register. It's a determination about what was the day that they were required to be 
registered and then they have a 90 -day grace period , effectively , to become registered.  
Senator HUME:   What happens to the funds they registered before that 90 -day period?  Was that illegal 
fundraising ? 
Mr Pope :  If it didn't seem to meet the threshold or the requirements under the Electoral Act, then probably 
not. They do need to do a disclosure for the last financial year . That is also part of the registration requirements.  
We will have a look at that disclosure when that is lodged with us , and I think that needs to be lodged fairly 
shortly.  
Senator HUME:   Sorry, maybe I've misunderstood. I am advised that the a ct states that the Vida Fund  had to 
stop fundraising the moment they raised $16, 900, not 90 day s after that period.  
Mr Pope :  No, they haven't —there's a 90 -day period for registration.  
Senator HUME:   Right. So the Vida Fund —did they break the law?  
Mr Pope :  Not that I believe so.  
Senator HUME:   If they have — 
Mr Pope :  I'll say n ot that I believe so , at this stage, if I can just —these things can be a bit of a moving feast, 
but, at this stage,  I don't have anything in front of me that says that that's  the case.  
Senator HUME:   Alright. If there is any reason that you would understand for that to be the case, can I ask 
you to follow the matter up and perhaps update me?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 67 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Pope :  We would do that not just with that entity but all entities.  
Senator HUME:   Terrific. I want to ask you about another entity  with a similar issue . There 's another 
fundraising entity called the Independent for Flinders Pty Ltd. This is for the campaign fundraising vehicle for the 
independent candidate for Flinders , Ben Smith. I 'm advised that his website shows that all donations to his 
campaign go directly to that particular fundraising vehicle , and he 's running an extraordinarily expensive 
campaign. According to the metadata, h e has spent at least $210,000 across Facebook and Instagram alone. That 
is the second -biggest social media spend of any candidate in this election. It 's only $2,000 short of Dr Monique 
Ryan , and that's before you factor in his campaign office, his leaflets , his yard signs  and his T-shirts.  
His fundraising vehicle hasn't registered at all with the AEC , despite clearly being an associated entity , and it's 
clearly raised funds beyond that disclosure threshold of $16,900, to benefit Mr Smith . I am advised that the 
penalty for failing to register is three times the amount that they 've illegally raised plus three times the amount 
that they have spent. Is that right? That could be over a million dollars worth of penalties.  
Mr Pope :  It's potentially direct . But it would, I think, also come back to th is 90-day issue . We'd need to go 
back and have a look at what stage may they have become required to register. And then are they still within the 
90-day period to register or has that 90 -day period expired ?  
Senator HUME:   Has the commission sought information from the body itself as to why it hasn't registered?  
Mr Pope :  I might ask my  assistant commissioner who specialises in this area.  
Ms Reid :  I can confirm that an independent for Flinders is on our environmental scanning list , so we are 
making inquiries  about that . 
Senator HUME:   Right. You know, Ms Reid, because w e had this discussion at the last estimates , this isn't the 
first time I've had to raise with the AEC the failure of these independents to register their fundraising vehicles. I 
suppose what I really want to know is : is there a reason that the AEC isn't or can't take more proactive action on 
these vehicles?  
Mr Pope :  I might quickly answer , firstly, and then ask Ms Reid to compl ement my answer . We've done some 
analysis recently , which indicates that 60 per cent of the entities that are active for this election have self -
registered. Thirty -five per cent of the entities have been discovered by our own environmental scanning. And they 
are work in progress. Through a whole range of avenues of environmental scanning, if you interpret that broadly, 
we proactively contact and say, 'We think you might have to register and you have a disclosure obligation ,' et 
cetera. Five per cent that are registered or are registering are brought to our attention through complaints or other 
sources. So 95 per cent of the time — 
Senator HUME:   I've only hit the tip of the iceberg . Is that what you' re telling me?  
Mr Pope :  It's been useful, because every bit helps. We take information from a range of different source s. 
But, as I think Ms Reid is saying , through this 35 per cent of our environmental scanning, this particular one has 
hit our rada  We have identified it and, therefore, we are engaging, trying to determine whether there is a 
registration obligation.  
Senator HUME:   It's amazing that a third of the vehicles that you've pick ed up— 
Mr Pope :  A little bit of additional context  is that we are seeing more entities involved in this election than 
we've ever seen before.  
Senator HUME:   Yes, that's fascinating. Clearly, there's a pattern of behaviour going on here. It's not just that 
there are more entities ; there are more entities that are, intentionally or otherwise, fall ing under the radar. I'm 
assuming it's from ignorance as opposed to simply thumbing their noses at the AEC and the obligations they have.  
Mr Pope :  It's also a little complex for new entities too. There 's an educative piece. There is an explanation 
piece. And s ome require a bit more assistance and guidance than others.  
Senator HUME:   Do you think that these entities would ever register if you didn't go and tap them on the 
shoulder?  
Mr Pope :  It's hard to answer that.  
Senator HUME:   I suppose so. Some of these bodies contribute enormous amounts of money to the electoral 
system , millions and millions of dollars , and they 're currently  avoiding the transparency that applies to the more 
well-established political parties. It 's happening until I raise them with you . Obviously, there  are more there. On 
the basis of the advice that you have given me  it doesn't sound like the entities themselves are changing their 
behaviour. I know there is an educative piece around that, but at what point does education cease  and enforcement 
begin ? There are millions of dollars floating around now that are essentially , potentially , being given a slap on the Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 68 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  wrist as opposed to being enforced —being given the fines that should apply. It 's not putting candidates on even 
playing fields at all.  
Mr Pope :  It's a very good question, but it 's a difficult one to answer because it 's a hard policy position to 
clearly articulate in words when there are factors such as levels of what sort of resources the entity has or ha s 
access to, language  barriers  and those sort s of challenges. So it 's difficult to articulate. I've got to say  that I've 
been reflecting over the last couple of weeks about  just how much the environment has changed with respect to 
entities in this election . One can only assume this is not going to roll backwards ; this is going to continue to roll 
forwards , I think , for future elections. I actually think there is a discussion to be had at the joint standing 
committee after the election about the process , and maybe even for parliament to consider whether the 90 -day 
period remains appropriate.  
Senator HUME:   That's food for thought post -election. Thank you for that. This is a bit off piste, but there is a 
new element of electoral matter,  and I want to understand how the AEC's engaging it, which is  through 
influencers and collaborators. This is something we haven't really seen before this election. I know that Instagram 
has now added a feature , collaborative posting. That means the same post is added to and authored by multiple 
accounts at the same time. I would imagine that this sort of posting doesn't change the obligation for a n electoral 
matter to be compliant with the act. Is that correct?  
Mr Pope :  It shouldn't, no.  
Senator HUME:   In the past couple of weeks , we've seen MPs do collaborative posts with influencers. For 
example, I know the Prime Minister put up three separate collaborative reels on Instagram  with Abbie Chatfield , 
where they both explicitly promoted the Labor Party and opposed the Liberal Party —an electoral matter.  And the 
Leader of the Greens , Mr Bandt , also  put up a reel with the same influencer , Abbie Chatfield, where the caption 
states : 'Vote 1 Greens and  put Labor above Liberal.' There are a number of other cases. I know Senator Waters 
met with an influencer, Holly M acAlpine.  This is going to keep on going. Based on what I've just described,  are 
those posts from the Prime Minister or the Leader of the Greens an electoral matter under the purpose of the act? 
Mr A Johnson :  We'd prefer to have a closer look at those posts before we provide opinions on them. But, 
stepping back, the definition of 'electoral matter'  excludes news and editorial  content , so we'd have to look and see 
whether content was being produced , of the ir own volition , by the person who is the influencer or whether others 
were buying or potentially using that as advertising and promotional content. So we'd have to look at that to 
decide whether that comes under the news exception or whether it's an electoral matter.  
Senator HUME:   Is this something that the AEC is going to provide guidance on —how to do collaborative 
posting —specifically  for those influencers that might not have had engagement with political content or 
politicians before?  
Mr A Johnson :  You're asking a hypothetical question — 
Senator HUME:   Sorry, the question  is: are you going to provide guidance ? That's not hypothetical?  
Mr A Johnson :  because you can go a step beyond that to saying , for journalists writing opinion pieces, at 
what stage does that shift from editorial  comment , as an opinion piece , and at what stage does it move beyond that 
to actually endorsing or promoting one side or the other ? I guess the answer is that it's  a very tricky one.  
Mr Pope :  I wouldn't mind having a look at the ones you've highlighted , and we'll consider that through the —I 
mean,  the definition of 'electoral matter ', as you know,  is fairly complex. I t's not just around 'electoral matter '; 
with influencers, it probably also comes down to the dominant purpose test with respect to those po dcasts. So 
we'll have a look at the ones you've highlighted and we'll consider if there 's anything that we might need to adjust 
and have a think about that.  
Senator HUME:   There is another element to it , too. Obviously there are some influencers that are potentially 
being paid to produce political social media on behalf of a party or on behalf of a candidate , and if that was the 
case— 
Mr Pope :  That's straight out.  
Senator HUME:   That's straight out.  
Mr Pope :  That's paid political advertising , so that is straight out. That is black and white.  
Senator HUME:   I would have thought so. What if it is a more informal relationship ? I will put this into 
context. There was an article in , I think,  the Sydney Morning Herald  that suggested that there had been a number 
of influencers that had been paid by the Labor Party to come to Canberra and be in the budget lock -up for the 
Labor Party. Now, if they produce content after having had even their logistics paid for, what are the implications 
of that?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 69 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr A Johnson :  We know that  political parties, when travelling around, take journalists with them , so there is 
that scope to invite or even have journalists travel to cover events. So, again, it would depend on the  
circumstances, as to whether it is inviting , or bringing , to attend an event or whether it is paying for them actually 
writing content that is endorsing , supporting, promoting and eventually  having, as the commissioner  said, that 
dominant purpose  of trying to influence the way someone, electors , will vote at the election.  
Senator HUME:   Okay. So w e're very much in a grey area here. What y ou're saying is that a party can say : 'I 
want you to cover the federal budget , so I will pay for your production costs. I'll pay for you to fly down. I'll pay 
for your accommodation. You can stay in Canberra.' And that's all fine as long as I don't say, 'I want you to cover 
the budget favourably' or 'I need you to do a couple of posts  spruiking my party and my policies .' Is that right?  
Mr A Johnson :  We would be looking at whether it is editorial content that they have control over writing or 
whether they are being directed or paid .  
Senator HUME:   How do you know?  
Mr Pope :  It would have to come down to analysing the voter, which is  why some of this becomes complex 
and time -consuming. I would probably say that our overarching advice to everybody in this space has always 
been and will remain: if in doubt, authorise.  
Senator HUME:   If in doubt , authorise.  
Mr Pope :  'If in doubt, authorise ' is the best practice. I t saves a lot of people a lot of effort.  
Senator McGRATH:   There is a difference, because m y understanding is that the mainstream media, when 
they travel with the political parties, actually pay for it —  
Senator HUME:   And they're credentialled.  
Senator McGRATH:   and they get billed  for their seats on the plane and the bus, and the accommodation  and 
what have you . So there is effectively a split between those who pay for themselves and this new branch of 
influencers whose  logistical costs are being paid for  by a political party. I think there is a clear difference there.  
Mr Pope :  We'll have to have a look at it. I'm not entirely au fait with the whole influence r world ye t. I'm 
getting close , but I'm not there yet.  
Senator McGRATH:   Join the club!  
Mr A Johnson :  If I can add  to that , this goes back to what the commissioner said before. Y ou're talking about 
new ways of communicating . I think  it's probably a matter for JSCEM to consider after the election  as to  whether 
there needs to be changes to the legislation and the regulations to clarify  it.  
Senator HUME:   My colleague just said it's essentially 'cash for comment', isn't it —potentially?  
Senator COLBECK:   Is there any formal intersection between this and the  media laws , which require 
disclosure of those sorts of things?  
Mr A Johnson :  That's probably more a question for ACMA and the media  regulators . 
Senator COLBECK:   We can potentially organise that. I'm curious , from your perspective —one of the ways 
that you might be able to determine the answers to that complicated and difficult process is by cross -referencing it 
to ACMA, in relation to their work, because it is a requirement, as I understand it, under that act.  
Mr Pope :  Possibly. As I said, these are grey matters. They're new and they're going to turn on the facts . We're 
going to need to look at the facts of each of the circumstances and determine whether there's a dominant purpose 
or whether there might be exemptions that could potentially apply. But I will just come back to what I said: I 
would encourage anyo ne who is engaging an influencer —or for any influencer who may potentially be 
engaged —to authorise, even if you think you  might not have to . It would be better to do so and it would be more 
transparent for the voter.  
Senator COLBECK:   I just want to go back to your opening statement . You talked about voting over 12 days, 
and you went through the number of voters and all of that sort of stuff. Is that assuming two five-day weeks for 
prepoll plus two Saturdays?  
Mr Pope :  That's right. Yes.  
Senator COLBECK:   I suspect you would have done a fair bit of scenario planning in preparation for this.  
Mr Pope :  Yes. 
Senator COLBECK:   If I look at the potential May dates that sit in front of us now—3, 10  and 17 May —17 
May and 10 May have a public holiday in  Queensland and the Northern Territory.  
Mr Pope :  That's right.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 70 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator COLBECK:   So it's down to 11 days in those two jurisdictions. But a 3 May election has Easter 
Monday and Anzac Day in all jurisdictions.  
Mr Pope :  In the first week of prepoll.  
Senator COLBECK:   Do you have any contingency measures to manage load in the circumstance where it's 
only 10 days? For the last election I think it was three weeks of prepoll.  
Mr Pope :  For the last federal election it was two weeks. The referendum was three weeks with remote voter 
services but still two weeks of prepoll.  
Senator COLBECK:   Are you considering, for example, additional hours on those three days if it is a 3 May 
election? I'm looking at Senator McGrath, because this reminds us of some JSCEM interactions after the 2022 
federal election, with the COVID overlay.  
Mr Pope :  No, we're not going expand hours into the evening like we did for 2022. But, you're correct: in 
terms of a 3 May election, if that were  to be the case, and under the legislation, we would not be opening prepoll 
voting centres on Easter Monday or on Anzac Day.  
Senator COLBECK:   No; that was my assumption.  
Mr Pope :  We have done some modelling with respect to what dials we need to adjust to move that demand 
into the remaining days of prepoll  without extending hours. We believe that we can make that work and still 
deliver an excellent service . 
Senator COLBECK:   I think that Easter Monday to Anzac Day week is also still a week of school holidays. 
Has that been factored into your conversations as well?  
Mr Pope :  Yes. It's factored into our planning , and I think it's a good opportunity for us to acknowledge —with 
four redistributions , school holidays cutting across the timetable, at least at some stage, for every state and 
territory, plus public holidays and long weekends —we're expecting an increase in declaration votes from right 
across the country. You would appreciate, given your experience, that declaration votes take time to take, but they 
also take time to get back to the home division  and be  open ed and count ed. 
I want to manage some expectations. It's great that Australians can vote everywhere and it's great that 
Australians love to travel —and I hope everyone has a fantastic time over the school ho lidays, Easter, Anzac Day 
et cetera —but this will have an impact on the time it takes to issue some of those votes but, probably most 
significantly, get those votes back to their home division and counted. There's a possibility here where there's 
some very close seats, potentially, that are waiting on envelopes to come back from 149 other divisions around 
Australia and 111 places overseas , plus postal votes , and we've got that 13 -day period. Over that 13 -day period, 
we'll be doing our best to get them back and count them, but it could take more time with a larger volume of 
envelopes.  
Senator COLBECK:   You're right. It does take a little while to go through the whole process to lodge a 
declaration vote.  
Mr Pope :  Yes. 
Senator COLBECK:   You're comfortable that you've got the workforce to actually achieve that?  
Mr Pope :  We will continue to do our  planning and our contingency, and , as I indicated in my opening 
statement, we'll be watching the data like a hawk every day. We will be able to adjust dials, predominantly in 
terms of issuing points and staffing , to try and do our very best to accommodate for those changes. I'm happy for 
the deputy to complement that or correct it.  
Ms Gleeson :  There's no correction. I  add, to give you some reassurance —to the Commissioner's opening 
statement about our forecasting process —that we equip all of our prepoll voting centres to be prepared for the 
busiest day, which, as you would know, is the Friday before polling day. We have enough staff, materials and 
ballot papers to accommodate the busiest day. Then we do a rostering process where we look at what votes to 
expect on a particular day. If we are faced with a timetable where there are two less days available to us, we'll 
look at that , and then we have all those staff that are available for the busiest possible day that we can bring 
forward into other days. We have plenty of redundancy to accommodate if there is less time in the timetable.  
CHAIR:   Thank you to the Australian Electoral Commission. We might see you again next week, but — 
Senator McGRATH:   We won't ! 
CHAIR:   Chances are you'll be very busy conducting an election, one way or the other.  
Proceedings suspended from 16:09 to 16:27   Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 71 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  PRIME MINISTER AND CABINET PORTFOLIO  
In Attendance  
Senator Gallagher, Minister for Women, Minister for Government Services, Minister for Finance, Minister for 
the Public Service  
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet  
Governance and Corporate Group  
Mr Martin Hehir PSM, Deputy Secretary and Chief Operating Officer, Governance and Corporate Group  
Mr Andrew Walter, First Assistant Secretary, Government Division  
Mr Arthur Spyrou, First Assistant Secretary, Ministerial Support Division  
Ms Callie Zorzi, First Assistant Secretary, Corporate Division  
Mr Justin Keefe, First Assistant Secretary, Digital, Security and Workplace Operations Division  
Ms Pauline Sullivan, First Assistant Secretary, Cabinet Division  
Ms Alison Green, Assistant Secretary, Protocol and International Visits Branch  
Mr Ben Keily, Assistant Secretary, Ministerial & Parliamentary Support Branch  
Mr Branko Ananijevski, Assistant Secretary, Cabinet Information and Governance Branch  
Ms Bridie Costigan, Acting Assistant Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat Branch  
Ms Cristy England, Assistant Secretary and Chief People Officer, People Branch  
Mr David Belgrove, Assistant Secretary, Parliamentary and Government Branch  
Mr Greg Baldwin, Acting Assistant Secretary, Business Services Branch  
Ms Karyn Cooper, Assistant Secretary and Chief Finance Officer, Finance Branch  
Ms Katy Lin, Assistant Secretary, Legal Policy Branch  
Ms Leonie Kolmar, Assistant Secretary, Communications Branch  
Ms Liz Caelli, Acting Assistant Secretary, Governance, Performance and Audit Branch  
Social Policy Group  
Mr Blair Exell, Deputy Secretary, Social Policy Group  
Ms Greta Doherty, First Assistant Secretary, Social Policy Division  
Ms Lee Steel, First Assistant Secretary, Intergovernmental Relations and Reform Division  
Ms Caitlin Delaney, Assistant Secretary, Education and Immigration Branch  
Ms Erin Rule, Assistant Secretary, Human Services Branch  
Mr Tim Johnson, Assistant Secretary, Care and Support and Aged Care Branch  
Economy, Industry and Resilience Group  
Ms Nadine Williams, Deputy Secretary, Economy, Industry and Resilience Group  
Ms Christina Garbin, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Economic Division  
Ms Janet Quigley, First Assistant Secretary, Resilience and Crisis Management Division  
Ms Lisa Elliston, First Assistant Secretary, Strategy, Projects & Priorities Division  
Ms Narelle Luchetti, First Assistant Secretary, Industry, Infrastructure & Environment Division  
Mr Jason Dymowski, Assistant Secretary, Resilience, Recovery & Response Branch  
Ms Joanna Abhayaratna, Assistant Secretary, The Office of Impact Analysis  
International and Security Group  
Mr Graham Fletcher, Deputy Secretary, International and Security Group  
Mr Tony Sheehan, Head, Royal Commission into Defence and Veteran Suicide Implementation Taskforce  
Dr Angelia Grant, First Assistant Secretary & G20 Sherpa, Multilateral Economic Engagement Division  
Mr David Titheridge, Acting First Assistant Secretary, International Division  
Ms Kendra Morony, First Assistant Secretary, National Security Division  
Mr Richard Sadleir, First Assistant Secretary, Quad, AUKUS and Naval Shipbuilding Division  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 72 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Frances Finney PSM, Assistant Secretary, Defence and Veterans' Services Commission  
Office for Women  
Ms Padma Raman PSM, Executive Director, Office for Women  
Ms Megan Leahy, First Assistant Secretary, Office for Women  
Ms Clancie Hall, Assistant Secretary, Office for Women  
Ms Hester Green, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office for Women  
Ms Telitha Schroedl, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office for Women  
Workplace Gender Equality Agency  
Hon Mary Wooldridge, Chief Executive Officer  
Australian Public Service Commission  
Dr Gordon De Brouwer PSM, Australian Public Service Commissioner  
Ms Jo Talbot, Acting Deputy Commissioner, Integrity, Reform and Enabling Services  
Dr Subho Banerjee, Deputy Commissioner, Head of APS Academy and Capability  
Ms Ashley Sedgwick, Assistant Commissioner, Workforce Strategies  
Ms Faye Liu, Assistant Commissioner, Australian Public Service Craft & Learning  
Ms Justine Curnow, Assistant Commissioner, Australian Public Service Reform  
Ms Kate Boxsell, Assistant Commissioner, Leadership & Talent Development  
Ms Kylie Barber, Assistant Commissioner, Integrity, Performance & Employment Policy  
Mr Matthew Bowd, Assistant Commissioner, Executive Remuneration and Statutory Offices  
Ms Melanie Mcintyre, Assistant Commissioner, General Counsel  
Dr Nicole Steele, Assistant Commissioner, Workforce Metrics Modernisation Program  
Ms Paula Stratton, Acting Assistant Commissioner, Integrity, Performance & Employment Policy  
Mr Shyam Raghupathi, Acting Assistant Commissioner, Professions & Pathways  
Dr Steven Munns, Assistant Commissioner, Diversity & Inclusion  
Mr James O'Reilly, Acting First Assistant Commissioner, Workplace Reform and Diversity  
Mr Tom Georgilas, Acting Assistant Commissioner, Enabling Services  
Ms Toni Dam, Acting Assistant Commissioner, People Insights  
Mr Mark Davidson, Acting Merit Protection Commissioner, Merit Protection Commissioner  
Ms Christine Shannon, Executive Director, International  
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet  
Workplace Gender Equality Agency  
CHAIR:   I welcome Senator the Hon. Katy Gallagher, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Minister for 
the Public Service and Minister for Government Services; Ms Padma Raman, Executive Director of the Office for 
Women; and other officers of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. I also welcome the Hon. Mary 
Wooldridge, Chief Executive Officer, and offer officers of the Workplace Gender Equality Agency . Would any of 
you like to make an opening statement?  
Ms Raman :  No, thank you.  
CHAIR:   Senator Hume.  
Senator HUME:   I have a very brief line of questioning for you, about your gender lens on budgeting. 
Specifically, when you have a budget, do you go through each item line by line —whether it be a roads 
announcement, a tax announcement, a health announcement or whatever it might be —and do your gender 
budgeting there, or is it more targeted to specific measures?  
Ms Leahy :  I think probably more the latter. The responsibility for undertaking gender analysis and gender 
impact assessment sits with departments —so departments developing proposals and submissions in accordance 
with the Budget Process Operational Rules . We will work with departments on particularly targeted measures, 
either measures that we think have the potential to significantly benefit women or measures that have the potential 
to exacerbate gender inequality. We will work in a more targeted way with those agencies, but we also support 
other agencies that seek our help.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 73 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Do the departments approach you with a list of measures, saying, 'We're going to do some 
analysis on this; could you help or advise?' or do you go to them and say, 'These are the measures we've identified 
that you should probably do some analysis of'?  
Ms Leahy :  It's a combination of both. We have good visibility of items coming forward, and we do our own 
process of identification. But agencies also come to us to seek assistance.  
Senator HUME:   And it's done prospectively, prior to the ERC process, as opposed to retrospectively after 
budget measures have been announced?  
Ms Leahy :  That's correct.  
Senator HUME:   What happens if there is a budget measure announced that has a gender impact that wasn't 
identified before the budget? Do you look at something and go, 'Should have probably picked that one up' or 'The 
department should have picked that one up'?  
Ms Leahy :  We engage with departments throughout the budget process. We have visibility, so generally that 
is not a thing that happens. Because it is part of the rules that the departments are required to engage with us, as 
part of the budget process generally, it is happening through the course, in the lead -up. 
Senator HUME:   So concurrent?  
Ms Leahy :  Yes, that's right. However, if that was to happen —and I can't think of a particular example off the 
top of my head —all these measures need to be implemented, and there are opportunities through implementation 
to— 
Senator HUME:   To make adjustments.  
Ms Leahy :  That's right. Not policy changes —a grants round is a good example. The design of the grants 
round might need to be further undertaken and have a selection criteria and things like that for the grants 
assessment panel. That might be a way we support the implementation process. Ms Hall might want to add 
something further.  
Ms Hall :  Only to add that gender analysis happens on all the proposals going through, in line with the Cabinet 
Handbook . It's those proposals that meet one or more of the five criteria that then require the more intensive 
gender impact assessment. That helps us ensure that that gender impact analysis is targeted to those proposals 
where there's the most opportunity to have a look at gender impacts.  
Ms Leahy :  One of the key principles around gender impact assessment and gender analysis in the Including 
gender  guide is around proportionality. We expect and work with agencies on greater rigour depending on the 
proportional impact they might have on gender equality outcomes.  
Senator HUME:   On tax, one of those areas that is always fraught with a gender perspective —let's put 
personal income tax aside; company tax is a hard one. How do you assess gender impact on a business tax —or do 
you?  
Ms Leahy :  That's an excellent question. I would defer to Treasury on how they would do that. I can't 
comment in the moment on how that might look.  
Senator HUME:   Let me give you an example, and you can tell me whether it came through the processes. 
The decision was taken to not include an instant asset write -off for businesses going forward. It should 
theoretically apply to this financial year but it's not in the budget for the next financial year. How would you put a 
gender lens on a decision  to exclude an instant asset write -off for businesses when it's taken through the ERC? 
How does that work?  
Ms Leahy :  The proportionality principle would apply. If there was an assessment, there may be an assessment 
by an agency that there would be a neutral impact from a gender perspective. With things like an instant asset 
write -off, you might be looking at: 'What industries does this instant asset write -off apply to? Does it apply to 
industries that are male dominated and more likely to have more men owning and running those businesses? Or is 
it applying to an industry that's more feminised or that has a greater gender balance?'  
Senator HUME:   The instant asset write -off applies to any business, but it's only a particular amount that 
tends to be for small businesses, and — 
Senator Gallagher:   Can I add: in the example you're giving —and I'm not speaking to the specific measure 
you're talking about —in the event of a time -limited proposal finishing, there wouldn't be a gender assessment 
done on that because it's from a previous budget. If it was time -limited, that would have been assessed at that 
point in time.  
Senator HUME:   So there's not a gender impact assessment done.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 74 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   A time -limited thing stopping at the time it was expected to stop would not be considered 
as a new policy proposal coming through.  
Senator HUME:   Right. With the personal income tax, it's little different, obviously, because we still have a 
gender pay gap. Inevitably, there are going to be gender impacts from any decision to do with taxation or indeed 
superannuation for the same reason. For instance, when the decision was made to tax unrealised capital gains on 
superannuation, I'm assuming that it went through your gender -impact lens or that there was some sort of gender -
impact assessment?  
Senator Gallagher:   That would have been two budgets ago, I think. Two budgets ago, gender -responsive 
budgeting wasn't fully implemented. We've only been building it up over the term. I would have to go back and 
have a look. Certainly, I would imagine, if gender analysis was done on that, it would have shown that women 
were not severely impacted by that because most women don't have anywhere near $3 million in their super 
accounts. We'd have to check whether it fell into that category, because there was no capacity for this when we 
came to government. We've been building up capacity. We trialled things in the October budget. We put in a more 
concrete process for the next normal budget cycle, and we've been building it up over the term, essentially. We 
never said in those early budgets that every measure was getting done, because we just didn't have the capability,  
which is now being built up, in the departments. Hopefully, if you sit in this position, you will keep that going, 
because it is a very important part of driving gender equality across the country to actually know how the 
decisions are affecting women.  
Senator HUME:   The tax changes announced in Tuesday's budget specifically affect only one tax bracket. 
Because of the gender pay gap, I think you can safely assume that there would be more women affected in that tax 
bracket than men. Is that right?  
Senator Gallagher:   It affects all taxpayers, but it would proportionally benefit those who are in part -time 
work and low -paid jobs because of the nature of the change to that lowest threshold.  
Senator HUME:   Those that are earning under $45,000 are the ones that benefit the most, proportionately?  
Ms Leahy :  As a proportion of their taxable income, yes.  
Senator Gallagher:   Some of that is covered in the Women's Budget Statement . 
Senator HUME:   Was there any analysis done of the effect on superannuation at that low end? The reason I 
ask that is that superannuation contributions are taxed at a lower rate, and that is done to essentially compensate 
people for the fact that they are quarantining 12 per cent, soon, of their income for potentially up to 45 years. The 
contract you have with government is that you pay a lower rate of tax when you put money in there, otherwise 
why would you lock it up? By dropping the percentage of tax paid at that level from 16c to 15cs, you're 
essentially equating the tax you would pay in super to the tax you would pay on your income, and then the 
following year you're actually paying less tax on your income than you are when you contribute to super. Is that 
something that you looked at?  
Senator Gallagher:   That's probably a question to put to Treasury tomorrow. There is some explanation or 
some assessment —I'm just having a look —in BP 1 and in the Women's Budget Statement , and, of course, we 
have tried to deal with some of the issues with the change to the $450 super -free threshold predominantly for 
women and those casual workers working in those low -paid industries. I think that really is a matter for Treasury 
in terms of the assessments they've done, as they've designed and supported our decision -making on the tax cuts.  
Senator HUME:   Was it something that you considered, though, Minister, when you were assessing this 
particular policy? Obviously, as the Minister for Women, it would be something you would be considering. 
You're aware of the fact that women are obviously lower paid and have lower superannuation balances. Now, this 
policy removes and in fact reverses the incentive to put money away into superannuation.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, we have a compulsory superannuation system here, so that doesn't change. We 
want — 
Senator HUME:   So, it punishes people for putting money in superannuation.  
Senator Gallagher:   We want people, particularly women, to have more super to rely upon at retirement and 
to earn more and keep more of what they earn now, and the way these tax cuts have been designed ensures both 
of those outcome.  
Senator HUME:   They would earn more and keep more of what they earned if they didn't put the money into 
super.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, I accept that you don't like super, and — 
Senator HUME:   No, quite the opposite.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 75 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   No, the coalition has always had a problem with super. I accept that.  
Senator HUME:   I worked in the industry. I like it more than you do.  
Senator Gallagher:   There's an ideological difference about super. Women are disadvantaged in terms of 
retirement savings. We want women to have more in super, which is why we're putting super on PPL, to make 
sure that in those gaps that they usually take through their working life they're not penalised. And we'll keep 
looking at ways to strengthen super for women. At the same time, we're looking at ways to make sure we can 
provide some tax relief —enduring tax relief —to Australian workers, and these tax cuts do that. And because of 
the nature of the way we've gone about it, women and those on low incomes will proportionately benefit the 
greatest from the way these have been designed.  
Senator HUME:   Essentially, though, you're punishing them for putting money away for 45 years rather than 
keeping it.  
Senator Gallagher:   No, we're not. That is your — 
Senator HUME:   Well, you're taxing more in super than you are outside of super.  
Senator Gallagher:   That is your assessment, which doesn't surprise me, because you're anti -super.  
Senator HUME:   I'm not. I worked in the industry, Minister. You know that I worked in the industry — 
Senator Gallagher:   But we support super and women having ways to increase their superannuation earnings.  
Senator HUME:   so I can't be anti -super.  
Senator Gallagher:   We know you were opposed to the tax cuts. You voted that way last night. So, you didn't 
want the tax cuts to happen and you now also don't believe in women having good super balances at the end of 
their career.  
Senator HUME:   Nonsense! I'm actually worried that you're taking money away from them.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, that is the argument you're putting today, and your concern about how the tax cuts 
are structured is amusing, considering that you opposed them last night —voted against them —and will go to the 
election as probably the only opposition ever to go about increasing income tax for Australian workers.  
Senator HUME:   Thanks for the talking points, but I just want to know whether you considered this when this 
policy went through the ERC — 
Senator Gallagher:   As you would expect, and different to the government that you were a member of last 
time, we consider all impacts across the budget about how measures affect women, because we have women at 
the centre of our economic policy, which is a very different contrast — 
Senator HUME:   So, you're comfortable with women paying more tax in super than they're paying on their 
income.  
Senator Gallagher:   to the approach that you took.  
Senator HUME:   So, you're comfortable with women paying more tax in super than they are on their 
incomes?  
Senator Gallagher:   There are concessional arrangements for super. It's a compulsory system. We want 
women to retire with more than they are currently retiring with and at the same time we want to provide sensible 
and responsible tax relief, something that you voted against last night.  
Senator HUME:   Sorry: can I just be very clear, and I'll leave it here. Did you consider the fact that low -
income earners, particularly women, will pay more tax when they put their money away in superannuation than 
they would if they took it as income?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, I've answered the question, Chair. She can keep asking the same question. I have 
answered the question.  
Senator HUME:   But you're not answering it. Yes or no?  
Senator Gallagher:   I have answered it, and I've told you that we consider all impacts and assess them as to 
their impact on women through the budget.  
Senator HUME:   And you thought that was okay?  
Senator Gallagher:   We think it's important to provide sensible cost -of-living relief and tax relief to 
Australian workers — 
Senator HUME:   Wow!  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 76 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   of which women are beneficiaries, and it's something you opposed, so I don't know why 
you're looking so shocked, because your position is to give no tax relief for Australian workers.  
Senator HUME:   I'm actually surprised that you would allow low -income earners to pay more tax in super 
than their incomes — 
Senator Gallagher:   Well, I'm surprised that the party of so -called lower taxes — 
Senator HUME:   That doesn't sound to me to be a very pro -women policy.  
Senator Gallagher:   voted to increase taxes and have said that they would repeal lower incomes taxes. So, 
we're both genuinely surprised. There you go, Senator Hume.  
CHAIR:   I just have a few questions myself. Congratulations on the passing of the target legislation yesterday.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, we're very, very pleased with that.  
CHAIR:   And I'm keen to get on the record its contribution to closing the gender pay gap, in its next evolution, 
in contributing to WGEA's already terrific work. So, how will it help close the gender pay gap? And how will 
WGEA support employers in that process?  
Senator Gallagher:   That's one for you, Mary. Look, we are really pleased about the legislation passing last 
night, despite the opposition opposing it, and we hope that in the event that they formed government they 
wouldn't be repealing important legislation like this. It was important that it pass before 1 April so that Ms 
Wool dridge and her team c ould start working with employers about  the next stage , which is what world -leading 
work looks like on the ground.  
Ms Wooldridge :  The requirement for companies to set targets and meet or make progress against them was a 
critical recommendation of the review of the Workplace Gender Equality Act, along with publishing the gender 
pay gaps. The reason it was a recommendation is that targets work to accelerate change. They're a well -known 
business practice across a range of things and, of course, in setting targets for gender equality. We know that that 
will make a significant difference to gender equality in workplaces and ultimately closing the gender pay gap.  
A really critical element of the design is that it is tailored in the context of the maturity of where companies are 
so that they can choose the measures that they commit to work towards and make progress on relative to their 
starting point, but, ultimately, the design of the scheme has been based on all of these things being critical for 
improvement on gender equality and ultimately closing the gender pay gap. So it's an exciting time coming up in 
terms of the implementation of that act working with employers. The good news is many employers set targets 
already, and some do on gender equality. So, for some, it will be about enhancing that and accelerating that rate of 
change and having public accountability around it, but, for many, it will be the first time that they do it. We 
believe that will contribute to a significant shift and progress going forward.  
CHAIR:   That's excellent news. I know you've got your second release of data on gender pay gaps. What 
trends are you seeing in that data? How are employers behaving differently?  
Ms Wooldridge :  Just a few weeks ago, we were very pleased to publish the second round of employer gender 
pay gaps . The data that we have published for the latest round of report ing to WGEA reflects the period in the 12 
months after the legislation was passed  but before the first round of gender pay gaps were published. Two very 
sticky measures that we think are important indicators actually showed a significant shift and positive change. 
That's the proportion of employers who undertake a gender pay gap analysis , which is so fundamental to knowing 
what's driving the change , but also a significant increase in the consultation with employees on gender equality 
matters. That was all before even the first gender pay gaps were published.  
We're just about to commence the next round of reporting where we will see the results in terms of outcomes 
from the first year after publishing gender pay gaps . But we believe that it has been a real catalyst for 
engagement, thinking, analysis and putting plans in place . We see that from the data , but also anecdotally we see 
that from what employers are telling us  about the changes they're making and how it's  focused attention  and 
engaged discussion at the most senior levels . And, interestingly, even prospective employees are asking about 
companies gender pay gaps in their interview processes . So it's happening right across the board. It's a very 
positive step forward.  
The second release of the information has shown a maturity in the engagement around the issue. We're clearly 
moving from a discussion about equal pay for equal work to an engagement about  the fundamental , structural,  
cultur al issues  that are driving differences in pay and  composition within employers and across industries and the 
nation as a whole.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 77 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   I think you said that employees are responding as well, so employees can see how a prospective 
company performs using the existing data. How c an companies compare their performance to other employers in 
a similar industry as a way of really assessing whether they're able to recruit the best staff?  
Ms Wooldridge :  WGEA has a data application on its website called the Data Explorer. If you haven't had a 
chance to have a look at it — 
CHAIR:   It's terrific.  
Ms Wooldridge :  please have a look. We have done some quite substantial enhancements to the capability 
within the Data Explorer for people to be able to utilise it in a range of ways. It publishes not only the gender pay 
gap information but also the range of information that employers report to WGEA, and it's a treasure trove of 
information across the board. The capacity to compare to both competitors and peers and the capacity to compare 
within industries ha s been significantly enhanced and extended with the latest release of information and update 
of the Data Explorer done by our very capable data team. The feedback we get is very important , because we 
know from the evidence from the UK that the competitive nature and the ability to compare to peers has been a 
driver of action and outcomes. So we've really enhanced the tool.  
For your interest, Chair, in the couple of weeks since we've published gender pay gaps, our Data Explorer has 
had 140,000 views, and there are 30,000 active users, which is a phenomenal number in terms of the information 
that the Data Explorer provides. It will continue to go from strength to strength, and we certainly encourage 
everyone to understand its full range of capabilities.  
CHAIR:   I presume, as we get more data over subsequent years, we'll be able to also see employers that are 
really significantly lagging behind in addressing gender pay gaps.  
Ms Wooldridge :  This year, we published for the first time the full range of measures, both average and 
median gender pay gaps as well as the quartiles by pay and composition. The ability to compare an employer's 
own performance over time and also their relativity to their industry will grow with the publishing of gender pay 
gaps. We can, of course, do that with the other data that's reported to WGEA; with the obvious and important 
focus on the gender pay gap as a proxy for gender equality as a whole, those comparisons will be able to be made 
on a year -to-year basis.  
CHAIR:   That's fantastic. I have used the previous iteration of the Data Explorer. Of course, under the targets 
legislation, there's reporting in terms of other actions, but you can also see boards and a range of other things. I'm  
interested to see how that intersects with Respect@Work implementation.  
Ms Wooldridge :  Recommendation 42 from the Respect@Work  report was the enhancement of the collection 
by WGEA of sexual harassment, harassment on the ground of sex and discrimination information through the 
WGEA gender equality reporting process. Information was released for the first time late last year in terms of the 
employers' reports of progress or work. It relates to everything from prevention initiatives to risk management, 
data collection and engagement of management and boards on the issue of sexual harassment. We've been able to 
see what comes out of employers in terms of whether there have been applications to the Fair Work Commission, 
the ombudsman or the Human Rights Commission. This provides, now, an insight into what's happening within 
employers in relation to the prevention of and response to sexual harassment. I think the results were that many 
are engaging, importantly, on the big issue of creating safe workplaces, but there's a lot of detail and important 
work to be done to make sure that's a comprehensive response, which is required by the positive duty. Once again, 
we get feedback that the capacity for employers to be able to see where peers or others in their industry are up to 
relative to their own performance is a motivator for the continued improvement that needs to happen.  
CHAIR:   I'm really pleased to hear that, particularly in the context that we're not talking about speed limits or 
lifting weights. There is actually a way of looking at risk in a workplace using these tools. I think that's terrific 
because for so long, unless you could see a risk, it couldn't really be quantified, assessed or looked at in terms of 
an organisation's commitment to those responsibilities. There have been trends overseas, for example, to do away 
gender assessments within government. What do you think the impact would be in Australia, if you ceased to 
exist?  
Ms Wooldridge :  I'd like to answer that question from the perspective of what I think WGEA contributes in 
the context of 40 years of work, particularly since the current act of 2012 —the significant contribution we make 
to working with employers to fulfill our purpose, which is to promote and improve gender equality in the 
workplace. Commentators very clearly attribute a significant portion of the progress on gender equality over the 
last decade to the work that WGEA does. Obviously, that's in conjunction with other initiatives that have been in 
place.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 78 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Providing the data and analysis back to employers to engage in both their performance and their performance 
relative to their peers —giving those insights and that knowledge is vital to making progress. Then there are the 
tools, resources and support that we're able to provide to address the opportunities that have been identified. Of 
course, there is also the research that we can do from this very unique dataset, including some research our 
research partner, the Bankwest Curtin Economics Centre, has done that shows a causal relationship between 
women in leadership and company profitability and performance. That's world -leading research. It has all been a 
significant contributor to employers being able to make progress.  
I was very pleased the Global Institute for Women's Leadership has done some international comparisons. 
They attribute the enhanced awareness but also improvement in gender equality to the Workplace Gender 
Equality Act and called our dataset world -leading. We know it is.  
CHAIR:   In that context, it's not just looking at the data that WGEA's produced. It's saying, 'We can see the 
density of women in leadership roles in particular companies and can compare that to profits,' for example.  
Ms Wooldridge :  That was the work of the BCEC report of 2020. Which, if people are interested, it's worth 
having a look — 
CHAIR:   I'll definitely look — 
Ms Wooldridge :  because it is, as we say, a significant and well -respected piece of work about that 
connection, which is we're here: to not only have a positive outcome in terms of women's engagement in work but 
that it is good for productivity, profitability and, for listed companies, their value. We have seen significant 
improvements over the last 10 years on a whole range of metrics, including the reduction of gender pay gap, the 
increase of women in management at the most senior levels and people on boards, and important things like 
enhancement and paid parental leave being provided by employers, in addition to by the government, and men's 
uptake of parental leave. Very clearly, what we try and measure is the benefits of gender equality for women and 
men in the workplace.  
Ms Raman :  Can I just add to that?  
CHAIR:   Yes. Thank you.  
Ms Raman :  I've just come back from the UN Commission on the Status of Women. In that environment, you 
don't just get to talk about Australia's progress over the last 30 years —in the current year, we had to talk about 
progress over the last 30 years in terms of gender equality —but you also get to engage with countries around the 
world. Repeatedly, people come and ask about WGEA and our workplace gender act, because it is world -leading 
and because we have had it for so long. It's something that I think we can be incredibly proud of because we can 
show that causal link and show the improvements that we've made.  
I got questions from a range of countries on how we've done it and what it has meant for Australians.  
CHAIR:   I'm really pleased to hear that.  
Ms Raman :  It's something that we spoke about in our national statement, for example, as a key achievement 
that we've had in terms of progress on gender equality.  
CHAIR:   I can see that Australia is leading the way and will hopefully contribute to global gender equality as 
well. Can I also ask the Office for Women about how WGEA's data might assist with gender -responsive 
budgeting?  
Ms Leahy :  I think data is really critical for gender -responsive budgeting, to enable agencies that are 
undertaking gender analysis on proposals to demonstrate the impacts on gender. I think WGEA's data, particularly 
at the more aggregate level and industry by industry, has a really positive effect on supporting gender -responsive 
budgeting.  
CHAIR:   That's things like funding for training, or those kinds of targeted — 
Ms Leahy :  Yes, funding for certain industries —if there is an investment happening in a certain industry or 
being proposed for a certain industry, some of the WGEA data can be used to demonstrate what the gender pay 
gap in that industry is or what the gender make -up of that industry is so that it can really help shine a light on 
gender equality or inequality in that industry and help to inform decision -makers of that. It can also help to have 
gender front of mind from the outset —for example, if government were looking to invest significantly in an 
industry where there were gender inequalities, what policy settings could be put in place in order to not 
exacerbate those gender inequalities or to help advance gender equality more proactively through that investment.  
CHAIR:   That's terrific to know, and I'm sure there's much more I could ask you in that context because I can 
certainly see the relevance of applying WGEA's data to a whole range of different government decisions —
procurement, for example, Minister. I think that does me for questions. Thank you.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 79 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Australian Public Service Commission  
[17:02]  
CHAIR:   Welcome back, Dr d e Brouwer , and thank you to all of the officers of the Australian Public Service 
Commission who have come here today. Dr de Brouwer, did you wish to make an opening statement this 
afternoon?  
Dr de Brouwer :  No, thank you, Chair.  
CHAIR:   Senator Pocock.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Thanks for being here again. I've got a couple of questions, and the first 
goes to the commissioner. I want to ask about the disgraced former Home Affairs secretary, Michael Pezzullo . 
We know that Mr Pezzullo was found to have breached the APS Code of Conduct on at least 14 occasions, 
including using his power for personal benefit. His appointment as secretary was terminated, I understand, under 
section 59 of the Public Service Act, on your recommendation as APS Commissioner, amongst others. Is there 
anything in the Public Service Act or the code to prevent someone such as Mr Pezzullo being reappointed as 
secretary?  
Dr de Brouwer:   The advice on termination was actually provided  by the Secretary of the Department of the 
Prime Minister and Cabinet, and he consulted with me. That's the process that's required under the Public Service 
Act. I'm not aware of any prohibition in the Public Service Act about reappointment. There 's nothing there.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   There is nothing there , so you can be removed , but, despite the range of 
disciplines that might've been applied , there is no impediment to re -employment despite the range of disciplines 
that might've been applied?  
Ms Talbot :  The one obligation that is on someone who 's undertaken a sort of process is you must disclose the 
outcome on any future employment for at least five years.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Is that outcome to any government service —to whom?  
Ms Talbot :  It's a requirement for any government employment that you would need to advise that. It depends 
on the processes . That might be different for different types of appointments , but generally people are often asked 
as part of that process whether they have previously been subject to a code or other disciplinary action. Ms Barber 
might have something further.  
Ms Barber :  As Ms Talbot was explaining, if someone is asked as part of a recruitment process whether they 
have breached the code of conduct —or, really, asked any question —there is an obligation on the candidate to 
provide an honest answer . If there wasn't an honest answer then that could be a cause for termination of 
employment.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Thank you for clarifying  that. Mr Dutton has signalled that he would 
reappoint the sacked secretary if he became Prime Minister, saying he was 'unfairly vilified by the current 
government '. This is the same Mr Pezzullo who was stripped of his Order of Australia honour by the Governor -
General, to my knowledge are relatively rare event. Commissioner, d o you think that Mr Pezzullo, someone who 
was found to have breached the code on at least 14 occasions and had his Order of Australia revoked , is a fit 
person to be a secretary?  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm not sure that 's an appropriate one to put to the Commissioner and ask for an opinion 
like that. I think it's really a matter for Mr Dutton to explain why he would think that an appointment of a person 
who had been found to have breached the code of conduct and terminated because of that would be appropriate to 
head up a department.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Minister, w hat message do you think it would send to the Public Service , 
which has worked hard to establish a code and to lift the culture and the leadership quality in our Public Service , 
if an appointment like that , of someone who had breached the code, carried no meaningful consequence for Mr 
Petrillo, who could be reinstated with a change of government?  
Senator Gallagher:   An element of your question is how important code processes are, and I think they are 
very important for the Public Service . There are public servants who have breached the code who continue to 
work in the Public Service because there is a range of different penalties or sanctions —or sometimes no 
sanction —depending on the nature of the finding of an investigation . But it's an importance internal mechanism to 
ensure appropriate conduct in the workplace . To have strong processes around the code, around sanctions  and 
around appropriate conduct and a whole range of other measures , which the commissioner has been leaning on to 
ensure integrity across the service is really important . One of them we 've put in place is to enshrine stewardship 
permanent ly as a  value in the Public Service Act . That's really to say  that, from the earliest entry into the Public Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 80 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Service at the lowest level all the way to secretary and head -of-service level , this is something that should be 
valued and respected all the way through your career.  
On the issue of the individual you asked the question about, I really think the only person that can answer that 
is Mr Dutton. He is the one who made those comments . He obviously has his own reasons for thinking that. The 
government's position has been clear in terms of the advice that was provided through the c ommissioner and the 
head of service.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Can I ask you, Minister?  You have implied a kind of hierarchy of 
misdemeanour in terms of people who have continued in the public sector having breached a code. I assume that 's 
at relatively lower levels. If we look at the misdemeanour of using your power for personal benefit, which is one 
of the claims against Mr Pezzullo that has been upheld, how do you rate that in the hierarchy ? For me, that 's a 
very significant act that I would think disqualified someone as a leader in the public sector.  
Senator Gallagher:   I think the government's position is clear on t he investigation as it related to that former 
secretary . Advice was provided , the government accepted that advice and the secretary was terminated. I think 
that's clear and shows how seriously we took the advice that followed the investigations.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Thank you.  I've got one more line.  
CHAIR:   I don't believe anyone else is seeking the call, but t he decision of the committee according to the 
standing orders and decisions that we have made is that we will conclude at a set time.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Thank you. I will be brisk. Minister, I want to go to the Australian 
Government Consulting service. Earlier today I asked the Department of  the Prime Minister and Cabinet about 
why the spending for in -house consulting, the Australian Government Consulting unit , was classified in the 
budget as 'not for publication '. Page 71 of Budget Paper No. 2 has lumped spending for AGC into an amorphous 
bucket under additional resourcing for the department, including national security. I was advised to question the 
head of AGC, Mr Knight, tomorrow, and I have received advice that Mr Knight is not appearing until next week , 
when  this committee doesn't sit. He 's not going to be here tomorrow , so I wanted to ask . Australian Government 
Consulting usually appears alongside you but isn't here today , so I'd some questions to be answered , if possible , 
today.  
The introduction of the Australian government in -house consulting unit was an important step in bringing core 
public service functions back into the APS from private consultants . I note the initial allocation was $10.9 million 
for AGC , and that was published in the 2023 -24 budget. The fact that details of its budget allocation in this week's 
budget are not for publication is a worrying development from a transparency point of view. Minister, w hy is the 
ongoing funding for AGC not made transparently clear to the Australian public?  
Senator Gallagher:   I think it is in the sense that , as you can see there from the additional resourcing  of $44.6 
million , that's being provided for a range of functions. We remain committed to it. I'm not sure why. It could be 
around when Australian Government Consulting was invited to appear . I'm not sure why that 's the case , but 
Australian government consulting will be consulted at the current staffing level . That's part of the allocation we 
have made to PM&C, and  putting it in the budget papers like that and singling it out makes that very clear.  It's 
early days looking  at how Australian Government Consulting works . I'm very committed to it  and to  trying to 
work out , as the group is doing now , where they can most add value and how they can be most useful to the 
service? We need to conclude our thinking on that  as well as future ways of funding this function  when they are 
providing a function that helps other agencies similar to some of the services offered by the APS C in terms of 
how we get the funding right. That 's all before us , but we remain committed to it. The early information I have in 
the briefs that I've got and the discussions I've had is that it is providing value to other departments but there is a 
little bit more work to be done.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Thank you.  Earlier with PM&C, under questioning it was suggested that 
there was only funding for one year for the service in the current budget. Is that your  understanding?  
Senator Gallagher:   We have certainly made sure that it continues funding whil st we work out the model 
going forward . Part of our thinking has always been that there would be a cost recovery element to this . So, yes, 
there is budget funding to continue for another 12 months. Obviously, w e will have further budget discussions 
within that time —hopefully, if we win the election —to look at how we set up the model in an ongoing sense.  I 
am certainly not walking away from the model. I think it has some real potential, but I also think we've got to 
make sure we get its focus in the area where it delivers the best gain across the Public Service and in a way that 
departments share the funding for that model.  
Presumably, if they are using Australian Government Consulting, they are not bringing in external advice and 
therefore they are saving some money and looking at how we —it was always the intention to look at having a Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 81 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  user pays cost recovery model. We accepted for the first couple of years, which we budget funded specifically for, 
that we would provide that funding. We have now guaranteed it for another 12 months and we'll finish that work.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Does that mean you expect it to stand on its own two feet through full cost 
recovery by the end of the next financial year?  
Senator Gallagher:   Not necessarily. I think the discussions I've had have really been looking at how you 
would taper and build it up over time. But in our thinking at this point in time, we have a few areas like this in the 
budget where rather than baking in a funding allocation before you actually determine the function, the role, the 
size and how it operates, you get that advice and then you make decisions based on that. So I think there will be a 
cost recovery user pay element to it. Hopefully, over time, the idea is that it becomes self -funding, but I don't 
know that you'd go from fully budget funded to full cost recovery like that.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Have you or any part of the service undertaken any formal evaluation of 
how the last two years have unfolded with specific recommendations into how it should proceed?  
Senator Gallagher:   I think that's what we're hoping for within the next 12 months, so within the next budget 
cycle. I've definitely had briefings. I've definitely had advice from Australian Government Consulting about the 
areas where they think the opportunities lie, but, for a Public Service that's been going for a long time, this is a 
relatively new function and they're trying to evaluate it as it's happening, basically, and then give us the best 
advice possible as we head into the next budget round.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   You haven't given me a firm figure for what is in the budget for the next 
financial year, but I have heard you say you expect it to be funded at the current staffing level. Have I understood 
that correctly?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. We want to see it maintained at the current level of staffing resources going in. We 
have given PM&C an allocation for them to allocate across their department. As Dr Banerjee has reminded me, 
they have made it clear that there are some national security reasons for why some of that information has been 
kept, I guess, in a global amount rather than broken down specifically. But, yes, that is the government's 
expectation. They've got important work to do. They need to report back and we need to make some decisions 
about what the ongoing model looks like.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I've got to say, the explanation around security was clear as mud to me this 
morning. It was very difficult to understand. Is it the case that there are no security implications in relation to this 
service but they related to the other parts of that item?  
Senator Gallagher:   I would think that's my understanding. I wasn't here for that evidence, but I remember the 
discussion when we were finalising the budget papers. We settled on an additional amount for PM&C and we 
made it clear that we expected resourcing to be provided to Australian Government Consulting to ensure that it 
continues its work and then reports back, essentially in the next budget round, to make some decisions about it in 
an ongoing sense.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Thanks for your answers.  
CHAIR:   I don't believe we have any further questions for the commission. Thank you very much for your 
attendance at estimates today, and thanks in particular that so many of you have come.   Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 82 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  FINANCE PORTFOLIO  
In Attendance  
Senator Gallagher, Minister for Finance, Minister for Government Services, Minister for the Public Service, 
Minister for Women  
Executive  
Ms Jenny Wilkinson PSM, Secretary  
Outcome 1: Support sustainable Australian government finances through providing high quality policy 
advice and operational support to government and commonwealth entities to maintain effective and 
efficient use of public resources  
Ms Cath Patterson, Deputy Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Paul Pfitzner, First Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Natasha Cole, First Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Stephen Sorbello, First Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Louise Sasaki, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Hannah Lipshut, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Gemma Cooper, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Romesh Guneratne, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Christine Duke, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Ms Donna Valenti, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Martin Rocks, Assistant Secretary, Budget Group  
Mr Nathan Williamson, Deputy Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Anna Harmer PSM, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Amy Fox, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Mr Simon Writer PSM, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Outcome 2: Support an efficient and high -performing public sector through providing leadership to 
commonwealth entities in ongoing improvements to public sector governance, including through systems, 
frameworks, policy, advice, and service delivery  
Mr Richard Windeyer, Deputy Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Nick McClintock, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Libor Pelecky, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Louise Starr, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Elliot Zwangobani, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Suzanne Hinchcliffe, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr David Webster, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Amy Parry, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Sacha de Re, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Scott Thurbon, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Cameron Jose Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Fotos Andreou, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Andrew Danks, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Gareth Sebar, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Sabrena King, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Rachel Antone, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Meagan Wilson, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Grant Stevens, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Paul Hubbard, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 83 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Lauren Le Cerf, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Ms Kelly Wood, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group  
Mr Nathan Williamson, Deputy Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Amy Fox, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Mr Simon Writer, First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Mr Sebastian Powney, Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Lucinda Atkinson, Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Mr Andrew Lalor, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Governance and Resource Management  
Ms Gayle Milnes, National Data Commissioner, Office of the National Data Commissioner  
Mr Andrew Taylor, Assistant Secretary, Office of the National Data Commissioner  
Mr Simon Newnham, Deputy Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Grant Lovelock, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Glen Casson, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Peter Qui, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Patrick Roberts, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Catherine McLachlan, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Laura Sham, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Carolyn Driessen, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Neil Dawson, Chief Financial Officer, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Sally Harris, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Kelly Hoffmeister, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Outcome 3: Support for parliamentarians and others as required by the Australian government through 
the delivery of, and advice on, entitlements and targeted assistance  
Mr Simon Newnham, Deputy Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Shannon Frazer, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Grant Lovelock, First Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Amanda Bruce, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Mr Alex McKellar, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Sally Bektas, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Ms Laura Sham, Assistant Secretary, Business Enabling Services  
Australian Electoral Commission  
Mr Jeff Pope, Acting Electoral Commissioner  
Ms Kath Gleeson, Acting Deputy Electoral Commissioner  
Mr Michael Lynch, First Assistant Commissioner, Electoral Integrity and Operations Group  
Mr Thomas Ryan, First Assistant Commissioner, Enterprise Transformation Group  
Ms Rachael Spalding, First Assistant Commissioner, Enabling and Regulation Group  
Mr Andrew Johnson, Chief Legal Officer  
Ms Joanne Reid, Assistant Commissioner, Disclosure, Party Registration and Redistribution Branch  
Ms Sally So, Chief Financial Officer  
Digital Transformation Agency  
Mr Chris Fechner, Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Wayne Poels, General Manager, Digital Investment Advice and Sourcing  
Ms Lucy Poole, General Manager, Strategy, Planning and Performance  
Mr Tom Gilmartin, Chief Operating Officer  
Mr Jamie Whitcombe, Branch Manager, Portfolio Assurance  
Ms Lauren Mills, Branch Manager, Strategy and Prioritisation  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 84 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Tom Marwick, Acting Branch Manager, Australian Government Architecture and Policy  
Mr Chris Huang, Chief Financial Officer  
Future Fund Management Agency  
Dr Raphael Arndt, Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Ben Samild, Chief Investment Officer  
Independent Parliamentary Expenses Authority  
Ms Christina Grant, Chief Executive Officer  
Ms Nicole Pearson, Branch Manager, Transparency, Assurance and Legal  
Mr Marco Spaccavento, Branch Manager, Corporate, Governance and Strategy  
Mr Michael Frost, Branch Manager, Travel, Education and Advice  
Parliamentary Workplace Support Service  
Ms Leonie McGregor, Chief Executive Officer  
Ms Kate Wandmaker, Deputy Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Scott Mischke, Chief People Officer  
Ms Leanne Martens, Acting Chief Operations Officer  
ASC Pty Ltd  
Mr Stuart Whiley, Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director  
Mr Ashley Menadue, Chief Financial Officer  
Mr Paul Gay, Chief Operating Officer (Multi Class Sustainment)  
Mr Alex Walsh, Chief Nuclear and Capability Officer  
Mr Richard Windeyer, Deputy Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Mr David Webster, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Mr Sacha de Re, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Australian Naval Infrastructure Pty Ltd  
Mr Andrew Seaton, Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director  
Ms Jane Lavender -Baker, Executive General Manager Corporate Affairs and People  
Mr Paul Bates, Chief Operating Officer  
Mr Richard Windeyer, Deputy Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Mr David Webster, First Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Mr Sacha de Re, Assistant Secretary, Commercial Group, Department of Finance  
Department of Finance  
[17:21]  
CHAIR:   Welcome back, Ms Wilkinson and other officers of the Department of Finance. I'll go to Senator 
Hume for 10 minutes and then I'll come back to Senator O'Neill.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you very much to officials. Can we start with debt. What is gross debt currently?  
Ms Patterson :  For 2024 -25, gross debt is $940 billion.  
Senator HUME:   Next year, it's forecast to go to what?  
Senator Gallagher:   Page 158, which is what you're reading from, has that.  
Senator HUME:   Actually, I'm reading from page 7.  
Senator Gallagher:   On Budget Paper No. 1, it's also contained there on page 158, but you can find it earlier 
as well. I'm surprised you needed to be told, that's all.  
Senator HUME:   Do you want to say it out loud, put it on the Hansard  transcript?  
Senator Gallagher:   It's clear in the tables and it's $177 billion less than what we inherited from you.  
Senator HUME:   Do you want to say the number out loud, Senator? Come on.  
Senator Gallagher:   The numbers are published. They're there for everyone to see, very transparently, and it's 
a lot lower than what it was under you.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 85 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Oh my goodness! I cannot believe that you cannot say the number out loud. It's like $275 off 
your power bills. Come on. Just say it.  
Senator Gallagher:   I've answered your question.  
Senator HUME:   Alright, I'll say it for you. Minister, has gross debt ever actually reached $1 trillion before?  
Senator Gallagher:   It was forecast to reach that, I think, in the 2024 — 
Senator HUME:   That's not the question I asked.  
Senator Gallagher:   I know that's an uncomfortable truth, but I just want to put that on the record.  
Senator HUME:   It's not the question I asked, though. You can't say the words. Oh my heavens! Come on, say 
it. 
Senator Gallagher:   The budget tables make it very clear. Gross debt was forecast to hit over a trillion dollars 
in PEFO in the 2024 -25 year. As we said in the budget, it's about $177 billion less than that because of the 
responsible approach we have taken.  
Senator HUME:   Does anyone want to actually answer the question? What will gross debt reach in the year 
2025 -26? Anyone?  
Senator Gallagher:   It is there, it's published and it's less than what was forecast in PEFO.  
Senator HUME:   Ms Patterson —let's stop playing games —can you just tell me. What does gross debt hit in 
2025 -26? 
Ms Patterson :  As set out on page 7 of BP 1, it is just over $1 trillion.  
Senator HUME:   Has gross debt ever actually reached $1 trillion before, Ms Patterson?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, it was forecast — 
Senator HUME:   I wasn't asking you, Minister.  
Senator Gallagher:   I know, because you don't like that answer. In your last budget — 
Senator HUME:   That's not the question I'm asking!  
Senator Gallagher:   the last report that you were responsible for, it was forecast not only to reach it but to 
exceed it.  
Senator HUME:   I understand the talking points, Minister.  
Senator Gallagher:   We have significantly lowered the debt burden that we inherited from you as part of our 
responsible budgeting. I know it's an uncomfortable truth; I know it is. But that is the reality, and you can't blame 
it on COVID because you had doubled the debt before COVID hit.  
Senator HUME:   I heard that in your answers in question time. I heard that when you repeat them on the ABC 
and on Sky. I just want an answer to the question that I asked. Ms Paterson, has gross debt ever actually reached 
$1 trillion before?  
Ms Patterson :  I don't have that in my folder. I'm just seeing if I can find it in the historical tables at the back 
of BP 1. I've got net debt.  
Senator Gallagher:   How much are you going to need to borrow for nuclear?  
Senator HUME:   If you want to sit on this side of the desk, Minister, you feel free.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, it is a legitimate question. Debt will be much higher under you — 
Senator HUME:   I get to ask the questions. I don't get to ask them for much longer, but I get to ask them 
today.  
Senator Gallagher:   if you need to fund $600 billion new nationally owned nuclear power stations.  
Senator HUME:   Chair, I'd just like an answer to the questions that I've asked, and they're pretty simple. Do 
you reckon?  
CHAIR:   The minister is answering the question.  
Senator HUME:   She's answering an entirely different one.  
Senator Gallagher:   No, I'm not.  
Senator HUME:   Ms Patterson, has gross debt ever reached $1 trillion before?  
Senator Gallagher:   In your last budget, it was forecast to exceed a trillion dollars in 2023 -24, 2024 -25 and 
2025 -26. Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 86 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   You're so defensive!  
Senator Gallagher:   No. You asked a question about when gross debt reaches $1 trillion, and I understand that 
it was in your budget papers in 2023 -24, 2024 -25 and 2025 -26. Because of the work we have done, we have 
considerably lowered the debt burden, and we're paying down debt. Gross debt is peaking lower than you had 
forecast. We will continue that approach going forward.  
Senator HUME:   I'll just ask it for the fourth time now.  
Senator Gallagher:   You can keep asking that.  
Senator HUME:   Has gross debt ever actually reached $1 trillion before?  
Ms Patterson :  On pages 342 and 343 of Budget Paper No. 1, if you look at the end -of-year figure, you can 
see those figures line up with the figures on page 7 —$940,000 million in 2024 -25 onwards.  
Senator HUME:   I'll just ask for the fifth time now. Has gross debt ever reached $1 trillion before the year 
2025 -26. 
Senator Gallagher:   It's definitely been published that we would exceed it, and that happened in 2023 -24, 
2024 -25 and 2025 -26. 
Senator HUME:   Oh my goodness! I'm just going to ask for the sixth time. Yes, or no?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, you can keep wasting your time, Senator Hume. Keep going; keep going.  
Senator HUME:   It's such a simple question — 
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, and we have answered it for you. We've shown you the tables. We've given you 
budget 101 and what pages it's on, and you can go and make your own video about that as far as I'm concerned.  
Senator HUME:   I can see it, but Hansard can't read it — 
Senator Gallagher:   So why don't you say it?  
Senator HUME:   so I'm asking Ms Patterson. Can you tell me has gross debt ever reached a trillion dollars 
before?  
Senator Gallagher:   So you know the answer.  
Ms Patterson :  Based on those two tables, no it has not.  
Senator HUME:   Gross debt as a percentage of GDP for this financial year is 33.7 per cent. Is that correct?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, it's quite a bit lower than what was forecast under you.  
Senator HUME:   Again, I just need a yes or no. I'm not asking you, Minister. Please just let me ask the 
officials.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm just going to keep saying it. I know you'd like to wipe the memory of everything that 
didn't happen and did happen under your government, but I'm here to just put it on the record.  
Senator HUME:   Chair, I just asked such a simple question. It was really basic.  
Senator Gallagher:   And you're getting factual answers.  
Senator HUME:   But I wasn't asking you, Minister.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm providing supplementary information that gives the context, Senator Hume, that you 
don't enjoy.  
CHAIR:   Senator Hume, the answers are clearly relevant to your question.  
Senator HUME:   You're so defensive.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm not defensive at all. I'm just putting some facts on the table that you keep trying to 
push past.  
Senator HUME:   The g ross debt as a percent age of GDP , for this financial year, is 33.7 per cent. Ms 
Patterson , is that correct?  
Ms Patterson :  As per page 7, yes, that is correct.  
Ms Wilkinson :  It's estimated to be that level at 30 June. Gross debt is an end -of-financial -year measure, and 
we're not yet at the end of the financial year. So they're estimates for this year and for subsequent years.  
Senator HUME:   And in terms of the estimate for next financial year, when we hi t the trillion dollars of debt , 
gross debt as a percentage of GDP jumps to 35.5 per cent. Is that correct ? 
Ms Patterson :  Yes. Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 87 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Gross debt  as a percentage of GDP  continues to grow, as far as I can see. It continues to  
grow to 36.5  per cent  in 2026 -27 and to just under 36.9  per cent  in 2027-28. Is that correct?  
Senator Gallagher:   Gross debt is forecast to peak at 37 per cent of GDP in this budget year, I think. Is that 
right? That' s 7.9 percentage points below the forecast  at PEFO . Like I said,  it's much lower . 
Senator HUME:   Just after what's in these budget papers.  
Senator Gallagher:   Gross debt is also lower every year of the forward estimates  than what was forecast at 
MYEFO , and it remains much lower than what we inherited . Gross debt had been  expected , at PEFO,  to remain 
above 40 per cent of GDP for the entire medium term . And the peak in gross debt is much lower th an that.  
Senator HUME:   Sorry, Minister, but that's not right.  
Senator Gallagher:   Again, they're just some facts on debt. Sorry —it peaks in 2029-30 at 37 per cent of GDP, 
which is 7.9 percentage points be low the forecast  at PEFO . 
Senator HUME:   So it doesn't  peak in this financial year as you said?  
Senator Gallagher:   Sorry, it peaks in 20 29-30. 
Ms Wilkinson :  It will peak on 30 June 2030. That's clear on page 76 of budget documents.  
Senator HUME:   Alright. The economic and fiscal strategy in the budget , which is on page 58 in BP 1, notes 
that the government's fiscal strategy is underpinned by 'limiting growth in spending until gross debt as a share of 
GDP is on a downward trajectory while growth prospects are sound and unemployment is low '. Would you agree 
that we 're still in that period of limiting spending growth?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. 
Senator HUME:   In 2022 -23, payments were 24 .4 per cent of GDP , and in 2023 -24 they were 25.2  per cent  of 
GDP. Is that correct?  
Senator Gallagher:   In the fiscal strategy,  there are a number of elements , and you're asking about one :  
Limiting growth in spending until gross debt as a share of GDP is on a downwards trajectory, while growth prospects are 
sound and unemployment is low.  
And t his budget of course delivers upon that. The rea l spending average  is 1.7 per cent, and debt is $177 billion 
lower than what we inherited. There are other parts of the fiscal strategy , such as this:  
Allowing tax receipts and income support to respond in line with changes in the economy and directing the majority of 
improvements in tax receipts to budget repair.  
We've bank ed 69 per cent of upgrades since coming to government, which of course is much more than was done 
under your government ; that was much lower , I think , on average around 40 per cent. Another part is this:  
Improving the efficiency, quality and sustainability of spending.  
We've  found almost $95 billion in savings, including savings in this budget. Of course, in  your last budget there 
were no savings . And another part is this:  
Delivering a tax system that funds government services in an efficient, fair and sustainable way.  
Senator HUME:   I don't need the entire podcast, Senator. I  just asked for a confirmation of two numbers.  
Senator Gallagher:   You were asking us about our fiscal strategy. There are a number of elements to it , so I'm 
answering that.  
Senator HUME:   I wasn't. I was asking about one sentence and then about payments.  
Senator Gallagher:   We're d elivering a tax system that funds government services — 
Senator HUME:   Oh my God!  
Senator Gallagher:   in an efficient, fair and sustainable way. We've got modest tax reform here, including tax 
cuts for every taxpayer.  
Senator HUME:   Chair, honestly, I don't need the entire morning note to be read into the Hansard .  
CHAIR:   Senator  Hume , if you 're asking questions about numbers that are right in front of you — 
Senator Gallagher:   There were a number of elements.  
Senator HUME:   I want to understand those numbers . That's kind of what budget estimates is about.  
Senator Gallagher:   You asked about the fiscal strategy and whether we were adhering to it , and I am saying 
yes. I just  took you through how we were doing that.  
Senator HUME:   I just  wanted to understand two numbers . Do you remember which ones they were?   Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 88 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   Real spending average of 1.7 per cent and debt $177 billion lower than we inherited. 
There you go; that's the answer to that.  
Senator HUME:   On plage 335 of BP 1 —let's try this again. I want to be clear. In 2022 - 23, payments were 
24.4 per cent of GDP. Then, in 2023 -24, they were 25.2 per cent. Is that correct?  
Senator Gallagher:   If you are just reading from the budget papers, yes, they are correct. That's why they're in 
the budget papers. We tend not to publish incorrect data.  
Senator HUME:   Minister, there's no need. You are so tetchy. I know it has been a big week, but let's cool it.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm not tetchy, it's just the — 
Senator HUME:   You're very punchy. Just leave it. I promise you, take it down a level. I just want to 
understand  these numbers.  
Senator Gallagher:   I know what you're trying to do and I am responding. I'm saying when you ask — 
Senator HUME:   You're jumping at shadows, Minister.  
Senator Gallagher:   if something printed in the budget papers is correct, my answer is yes. All of the 
numbers, unless advised otherwise, are correct, because Finance does an excellent job on publishing correct 
numbers in the budget.  
Senator HUME:   Excellent. I'm just trying to get the pattern here. Payments as a percentage of GDP were 26.2 
per cent in 2024 -25, and in 2025 -26 the forecast is 27 per cent of GDP. Is that correct?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. 
Senator HUME:   Thank you, for the Hansard transcript —that is very helpful. Each year the proportion of the 
economy that is government spending is growing. Is that correct? It has been. It has come down from 31.4 under 
you— 
Senator HUME:   Yes, from the COVID  years.  
Senator Gallagher:   and we have been reducing that in areas, including weaning off some of those COVID 
measures — 
Senator HUME:   Yes, COVID's over.  
Senator Gallagher:   The fiscal strategy doesn't say that there will be zero spending. Just to be clear, where we 
say 'spending restraint' —and we have shown that, I can tell you that, because of the amount of good ideas that 
people would like to fund that haven't been funded —that spending has been carefully assessed for efficiency, 
value and need, addressing areas like Medicare and areas that have been underdone — 
Senator HUME:   I have lots of questions, Minister. I just want to be very clear on this.  
Senator Gallagher:   Weaning it down off the COVID peak has been an important part, and I imagine it will 
settle just above a quarter, as outlined in the budget papers.  
Senator HUME:   As it has been weaned down from the COVID peak, theoretically, it does seem to have 
ramped up again. I'm wondering how this is limiting growth in spending.  
Senator Gallagher:   By real spending growth averaging 1.7 per cent —that's how it's done.  
Senator HUME:   Even though the proportion of the economy that is now government spending has been 
growing for four years, that is still, in your mind, limiting growth in spending?  
Senator Gallagher:   The budget papers show that real spending growth averages 1.7 per cent, which is just 
about half of what it was under you.  
Senator HUME:   But as a proportion of the economy it's not.  
Senator Gallagher:   It's just about half of the spending growth that was under the former government. Where 
we've showed spending restraint, that is correct — 
Senator HUME:   I'm not looking at the COVID  years. I think the world knows that we threw the kitchen sink 
at COVID — 
Senator Gallagher:   that is exactly what we are doing.  
Senator HUME:   What I wanted to understand was whether those numbers —spending as a proportion of 
GDP, which continues to climb —are your idea of limiting growth expenditure, and you're saying yes.  
Senator Gallagher:   If you look at it across that table, you will see that what you say is not true. You say it is 
continuing to climb, and you can see in 2026 -27, 2027 -28 and 2028 -29, that is not the case.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 89 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Yes. It falls dramatically. I have some questions about that. According to the 2024 -25 
budget papers, spending in 2025 -26, was forecast to be $762.2 billion, and spending in 2026 -27 would be $786.7 
billion. That's on page 66. But the 2025 -26 budget papers show payments for 2025 -26 and 2026 -27 are forecast to 
be $777 billion and $802 billion respectively.  
Senator Gallagher:   Which is also lower than what was forecast in the PEFO.  
Senator HUME:   So, at a time when your own economic — 
Senator Gallagher:   Okay, don't worry about that! It's of zero interest.  
Senator HUME:   We're talking about something that's current as opposed to three years ago.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm just saying that in the PEFO that figure was 27.2 per cent.  
Senator HUME:   I know, but you're really defensive about your own data here, Minister.  
Senator Gallagher:   No, I'm not. I'm not at all.  
Senator HUME:   Cool it. I promise you —I just want to understand it.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, I believe you, Jane!  
Senator HUME:   So, at a time when your own economic and fiscal strategy says to limit spending growth, 
payments have grown by $30 billion —is that right?  
Senator Gallagher:   The payments have grown as outlined in table 10.1, and it's lower than what you forecast 
at PEFO and has come down considerably from the 31.4 per cent in 2021.  
Senator HUME:   It's about $30 billion, though, isn't it?  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't have a calculator here. I presume you may have that before you.  
Senator HUME:   We'll take it as read; it is $30 billion.  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't really take your numbers as read.  
Senator HUME:   They're your numbers.  
Senator Gallagher:   It is as outlined in table 10.1.  
Senator HUME:   The impact of policy decisions  is how much of that  $30 billion?  
Senator Gallagher:   There would be a component of that. Some of it will be movements in estimates 
variations.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Senator, I'm not quite sure what quantum you're talking about, but table 3.3 on page 66 shows 
the effect of policy decisions on payments over the forward estimates.  
Senator HUME:   Which I'm working out to be about $25 billion.  
Ms Wilkinson :  It says that it's $20.7 billion. This is between MYEFO and the budget, and then parameter 
variations offset that.  
Senator HUME:   My estimate there is that policy variations don't actually count for a hell of a lot.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Policy variations brought down the increase in payments so that the net over the forward 
estimates is a fall of $7.3 billion.  
Senator HUME:   We're already dealing with two years here, so my estimate is that, of that $30 billion in 
payments — 
Ms Wilkinson :  I'm not sure what —sorry, I was looking at table 3.3. You can see the total over the forward 
estimates and what the movements have been.  
Senator HUME:   I'm looking at the two years where payments are growing as a proportion of GDP. I was 
trying to spell out the numbers that I was using, but unfortunately the minister was talking over me.  
Senator Gallagher:   You've got the floor.  
Senator HUME:   Spending in 2024 -25 and 2025 -26 was forecast to be $762.2 billion and spending in 2026 -27 
was forecast to be $78.6 billion. That's on page 66 in BP 1 —sorry, I'm looking at the previous budget. The 2025 -
26 budget papers show that 2025 -26 and 2026 -27 are forecast to be —and there it is —$777 billion and $802 
billion, respectively. So that's a $30 billion difference. I'm calculating policy decisions to be around $25 billion of 
that $30 billion difference, and that seems to be what table 3.3 on page 66 shows. Policy decisions are about $25 
billion over two years.  
Ms Patterson :  To clarify to help us match your calculations, are you just looking at the 2025 -26 and 2026 -27 
estimates —just those two years?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 90 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Yes, just two. What I'm trying to understand is how an additional $30 billion in spending in 
just two years in this budget is 'limited spending'. At first I thought, 'Maybe it is just budget variations,' but it's 
not. It's not estimates variations; it's policy decisions.  
Ms Patterson :  It's p olicy decisions . Essentially, for the effect of policy decisions in MYEFO, are you adding 
together the $8,557 million  and $5,175 million  and then working down what the additional changes between 
MYEFO to the 2025-26 budget and adding $7,141 million  and $4,230 million?  
Senator HUME:   Yes. 
Senator Gallagher:   Your point being?  
Senator HUME:   The $30 billion in spending, the vast majority of which are policy decisions, not estimates 
variations —that's 'limited spending'?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, I've answered that before. It's real spending growth of 1.7 per cent and lower debt 
of $177 billion.  
Senator HUME:   So spending will be 27 per cent of GDP in 2025 -26? 
Senator Gallagher:   Which is lower than you forecast at PEFO.  
Senator HUME:   When was the last time —excluding the COVID years, which obviously involved some 
major programs —that spending was at 27 per cent of GDP?  
Senator Gallagher:   Sorry?  
Senator HUME:   When was spending last at 27 per cent of GDP, outside of the COVID years?  
Senator Gallagher:   Oh, right. Okay. So you've taken those difficult years for you, in terms of spending, out. 
They're not relevant, are they?  
Senator HUME:   Well, they were difficult years for all of us, Minister. I know that because you ran the 
committee that oversaw all that spending.  
Senator Gallagher:   They're not relevant, and coming out of COVID —and reducing that over time 
presumably is not relevant, which is what we do?  
Senator HUME:   I wasn't asking that. I just wanted to know when spending was last 27 per cent of GDP.  
Senator Gallagher:   It was last at 27 per cent of GDP in 1920. It then went up to 31.4 in 2021, and it has since 
come down. Then it is forecast in 2025 -26 to be as you can see there.  
Senator HUME:   So, outside of the COVID years, according to your budget papers the last time spending as a 
percentage of GDP was 27 per cent was 1985 -86. Is that right?  
Senator Gallagher:   According to table 10.1 —I think we're following the same numbers.  
Senator HUME:   Yes. 
Senator Gallagher:   Of course, it would go up more with your fuel excise commitment that you are planning, 
I think, with $6 billion in one year.  
Senator HUME:   Well, you'll have to wait and see tonight, won't you? Spending in 2025 -26 is a three per cent 
increase in spending on 2024 -25, which itself was a six per cent increase on the previous year. That is on page 
335, yes? I'm getting nods. So if government spending is higher as a proportion of the overall economy —as it has 
been since the 1980s, outside of COVID —and it has risen each year since you came to government, and gross 
debt has continued to grow and is about to reach $1 trillion, explain exactly how you are keeping to your 
economic and fiscal strategy of keeping spending growth down until gross debt stabilises.  
Senator Gallagher:   I've already answered that question. I answered that question, and you talked over the top 
of me. I can give it again, if you'd like me to go through the elements of our fiscal strategy.  
Senator HUME:   You can table the talking points if you want to.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, no. I've gone through it. If you'd like me to repeat it, I'm happy to, but you talked 
over the top of me last time, so I'm not sure there's much value for those watching at home — 
Senator HUME:   No, I don't think there is an excuse.  
Senator Gallagher:   There are a number of elements to our fiscal strategy. If you break it down into all of the 
areas that I spoke about before, you will see that we have been guided by our fiscal strategy at all times. There are 
a number of pressures on the budget. The pressures on the budget are increasing, not decreasing. You yourself 
have called for an increase in spending in a whole range of areas. You are not on your own. There is a lot of 
pressure on it, whether it be in aged care, health. The NDIS is coming back into a more normal range of growth — Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 91 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Eight per cent is still very high.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, it was growing at 22 per cent under you.  
Senator HUME:   I know.  
Senator Gallagher:   Twenty -two per cent!  
Senator HUME:   All that reform that we tried to do you wouldn't allow us to do. You just had to do it under 
you guys.  
Senator Gallagher:   Absolute rubbish.  
Senator HUME:   That's alright. You can offer to help.  
Senator Gallagher:   We've now done it and we're getting it back into a more sustainable program going 
forward. We've got pressures in defence. We inherited $1 trillion of Liberal debt from you, and we've been paying 
it down.  
Senator HUME:   No, you didn't. You created it. There it is. It's Labor debt.  
Senator Gallagher:   Oh, right.  
Senator HUME:   It happens next year. It was never a trillion dollars under us. It's a trillion dollars under you.  
Senator Gallagher:   People have memories. They understand what happened.  
Senator HUME:   Yes, they do. They can also sniff out a mistruth.  
Senator Gallagher:   And we are paying that down. The budget papers show that gross debt is a lot lower than 
what we inherited from you.  
Senator HUME:   It never hit a trillion.  
Senator Gallagher:   We found savings where you had found none — 
Senator HUME:   Aha! That is excellent ; that's what I want to know.  
Senator Gallagher:   and we are delivering meaningful but modest tax reform as well in this budget.  
Senator HUME:   Excellent. Spending growth, as you pointed out, halves  from six per cent down to three  per 
cent in 2025, and then it drops another 80 per cent the following year, to 0.5 per cent. What 's causing th is 
significant change in spending growth compared to previous years ? Have you suddenly learnt how to  say no, 
Minister?  
Senator Gallagher:   The budget reflects the decisions of government, Senator Hume.  
Senator HUME:   What 's causing the drop in spending ? 
Senator Gallagher:   The budget reflects all of the decisions of government.  
Senator HUME:   You can't explain it?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, the budget explains it. It reflects the decisions of government  in a very transparent 
and open way.  
Senator HUME:   Two point nine per cent to six per cent to three per cent —it grows and grows and  then it  
comes crashing back down  in the following year. You can 't explain it?  
Senator Gallagher:   I can explain it in the sense that all the decisions the government ha s made are reflected 
in the budget papers  before you . 
Senator HUME:   You ha d so many talking points for every other issue . You don't have any for this one?  
Senator Gallagher:   That's the answer . That's the answer . I can't help it if you cannot process that. That is the 
answer.  
Senator HUME:   Okay . I'll take your word for it. I have plenty of other questions.  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Neill  has been waiting for the call.  
Senator O'NEILL:   It's n ice to be back with this committee . I've asked many times  in this committee and in 
two separate parliamentary inquiries about the way the former coalition government's cuts to the Public Service 
led to an overreliance and massive spending on external consultants. The coalition have announced that they 
intend to cut 40,000 jobs from the Public Service if they win government and bring the Public Service back to the 
coalition's 2021 -22 levels. Are you familiar with the 2021-22 Australia government audit of employment 
document?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. Finance did that work.  
Senator O'NEILL:   I've got copies here to table.  I've got a couple of questions.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 92 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   Yes. 
Senator O'NEILL:   I'll draw your attention to page 3. This audit is from  2021 . At the staffing levels the 
current opposition leader , Peter Dutton,  and shadow Treasurer , Angus Taylor,  say they wish to return to under a 
coalition government , the spending is allocated here. What I see is that at that time, 2021-22, under the coalition , 
they spent almost $21 billion in one year on external labour consultants, contractors and labour hire. Is that 
correct?  
Ms Patterson :  Yes. 
Senator O'NEILL:   The part that refers to that  and puts that on record, is that paragraph 2 on page 3? 
Ms Patterson :  Yes, that is referring to where we looked at the data for 2021-22 and the size of the external  
labour force and what the cost of that would be.  
Senator O'NEILL:   The size of the external  labour force there — 
Ms Patterson :  From that audit of employment was 53,900.  
Senator O'NEILL:   For general Australians who are looking at this,  how many people were  Senator Hume 
and her colleagues employing in full -time positions on top of the APS through consultancies, contractors and 
labour hire ? The answer is 54,000 , in rough numbers . 
Ms Patterson :  In rough numbers,  yes. 
Senator O'NEILL:   The cost was $20.8 billion ; I'll round  that to  $21 billion.  How much work was  outsourced , 
as a percentage of all departmental expenses ?  
Ms Patterson :  As set out on page 3 of the report, around one in every four dollars spent by agencies for 
departmental purposes was on external labour services.  
Senator O'NEILL:   So one in four? If you're not into fractions, maybe a percentage translates a little bit 
clearer for you —25 per cent was actually being outsourced to the consultants, which I think have been properly 
documented in the course of the inquiries of this parliament as ripping off the Australian taxpayers. That is what 
the current opposition are saying they want to go back to. Is it fair to say that this means the figures that we've 
seen here describe the kind of Public Service structure and obscene spending on consultants and external labour 
hire that the current opposition are proposing to return to?  
Senator Gallagher:   It's probably difficult for Finance to answer that. It certainly looks like it to me. From the 
public commentary and from a number of spokespeople, including Mr Dutton, Senator Hume and Mr Taylor, it 
would seem that they are wanting to cut 40,000 jobs. If they do that, it will have a massive impact on the Public 
Service and its ability to do its job properly, and so they would have to outsource and bring in that labour. There 
is absolutely no way you can cut 40,000 jobs and not replace them somehow. I think what the audit showed was 
that the way they had kept the Public Service artificially low for so many years was by, essentially, employing 
people off the books. They weren't reported through the budget papers as ASL in the normal way, and they were 
kept out of the accountability and transparency that's provided through committees like this. You can know this 
because departmental expenses kept going up but ASL remained flat. The outsourcing was the gap between 
departmental resourcing and actual ASL being reported.  
Senator O'NEILL:   To be clear, what they're proposing is to go back to the bad old days, which we've just 
described, at the levels of one in four being outsourced workers —if they're actually going to provide any services 
at all.  
Senator Gallagher:   What they're promising, it seems to me, is a 20 per cent cut to the Public Service. They 
would need to replace that because the new jobs have been in all of those frontline areas —ATO, Defence, 
national security, Home Affairs, Services Australia of course, and the NDIA. They are all front -facing agencies 
that had significant pressure on them and also challenges about delivering service outcomes. If those are the jobs 
that are to go —a third of them have been replaced from labour hire and then there has been additional resourcing 
on top of that —they would have to employ external labour to do that work. There is no way. The people of 
Australia would not get their payments on time. They would not get their social security handled properly. 
Veterans would go back to 42,000 unallocated claims. We know of veterans who died waiting to have their claims 
allocated. That doesn't happen anymore. It doesn't happen anymore, because we've got people actually doing the 
work.  
Senator O'NEILL:   Minister, you oversaw the creation of an in -house consultancy capacity within our Public 
Service, which has provided a real alternative to purchasing the services of external consultants. We know from 
our enquiries that those sorts of consultants appear to charge a very significant premium without proper expertise. 
We were paying for things that we weren't getting, essentially, under the former government. In coordination with Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 93 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Treasury ministers we've also seen a wide range of action cracking down on this conduct with the big four 
consultancies in particular. I'm of the view that these announcements have created a safer and more sustainable 
government use of consultants and labour hire, only when necessary. My question is: can you, or the department 
if it's appropriate, explain the way in which these announcements undertaken on your watch have positively 
impacted both the security and the stability of government departments?  
Senator Gallagher:   There are a couple of things , which cross over both Finance and the Public Service . 
When I came into the job it was clear that there was a reduced capability within the Public Service to do the job 
that we needed them to do , so things like having consultants write cabinet papers  or sitting on executive 
committee s. The outsourcing arrangements had infiltrated jobs that we believe should be done only by public 
servants , who have the Public Service Act and codes of conduct that appl y to them . There was a lack of 
capability , or a reduced capability —I don't want to look like I 'm being critical of the Public Service because it 
wasn't the Public Service's  fault. It was the decisions of government that enable d that environment to occur —it 
had to occur because agencies were not allowed to employ staff through the Public Service Act.  There was a 
directive that they were n't allowed to. But if you get extra work and you have to deliver  then the agencies had to 
work out a way to deliver that work . And if you 're not allowed to employ people on the books, you go off the 
books.  I don't blame the Public Service for that at all. It was the former government's decisions that had created 
that environment . 
So there were  capability issues, but there was also underinvestment in areas where demand was continuing to 
grow . We saw that in Veterans' Affairs, we saw that in visas, we saw that in environmental approvals that were n't 
being approved on time. Probably people's most day -to-day contact would be in Services Australia , where we 
have hundreds of thousands of engagements with Australians every  single  day through that agency , through the 
telephony or online services or through going into the service centres themselves.  
Where we have matched resources to outcomes we are seeing significant improvements, and that goes for the 
NDIA as well. Claiming the age pension used to take three months , it's now around a month. Paid parental leave 
took one month , it's currently three days. Access to the PBS safety net resulting in cheaper drugs would take 146 
days. It now takes two.  
Senator O'NEILL:   What a difference ! 
Senator Gallagher:   Medicare claims would take seven days to process , now they take two days. Carers would 
wait 76 days for carers payment rather than 17 days now . And for crisis payments —that is , those who are often 
leaving violent households or situations —people were made to wait for five days. Those payments are now paid 
in one  day. Families claiming family tax benefit would wait 54 days , they are now waiting six  days. We know in 
Veterans' Affairs  there were 42,000 claims that were left unallocated . It used to take up to 200 days before they 
were even looked at . Now claims need to be allocated within two weeks. Respect for the veterans, making sure 
that they are having — 
Senator O'NEILL:   It's got to happen more often than just on Anzac Day, hey?  
Senator Gallagher:   Exactly. The processing of claims , with money in the pockets of veterans , has returned to 
an average of 298 days , more than doubling the current time. That 's how long people would wait. Environmental 
approvals for business, they have more than double d the on -time approvals for projects.  
We've been watching this carefully, where we put extra resources, and sometimes they are time  limited as we 
work out how much actually is needed in an ongoing sense. We 've put in 3 ,000 extra staff in Services Australia, 
but there are some reductions in this budget because they 've dealt with some of the backlog and the pressures that 
were being experienced . Now we can work with that agency , with Finance , to work out what is actually needed in 
an ongoing way —you have efficiency , you're pushing productivity across the organisation, but what is a 
reasonable level of resourcing? We 're doing the same with  the NDIA as well. They would be the big ones. To me, 
it's the sensible way to operate a public service that is there to serve the Australian community.  
Senator O'NEILL:   Yes. It's an interesting point. I grew up not knowing what a public servant was , and I 
know that 's almost unimaginable for people here in Canberra, right? I remember asking my mum, ' What is a 
public servant ?' It was only somebody who she knew at the post office . That was the job that a public servant had, 
but it's so much more than that. You 've just described some of the ways that people who want to help the ir 
community can get a job in the government to serve their fellow citizens. That 's what it really is.  
You talked about Services Australia. We've just had Cyclone Alfred and we've had floods in Eugowra, in the 
seat of Calare. We've had fire and floods across this whole country. The image that's created for what I consider 
malign purposes of public servants is very dismissive; it diminishes the value they have and pretends that they 
haven't got important skills and that they're not important to the public. How vital are people who are called Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 94 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  frontline staff or who are derided as somebody sitting in their cardigan in a back office on the phone? That's very 
insulting, but how vital are those people to responding to things like Cyclone Alfred?  
Senator Gallagher:   Ex-Cyclone Alfred is a great example of how the Public Service works in the interests of 
the nation. If you remember previous natural disasters, there's been some criticism, usually from the states, on 
how long it took to get defence personnel out, waiting for payments or getting help on the ground. I think it is a 
combination of the work of Senator Sheldon and Minister McAllister, being on the ground both in New South 
Wales and Queensland. NEMA, which didn't exist before —part of the new jobs are in NEMA, which got rave 
reviews from both those states about how it played that coordinating function throughout the emergency — 
Senator O'NEILL:   For people don't understand and have never heard of NEMA —that's something that's 
happened —what does it stand for and why is it so important?  
Senator Gallagher:   That's the National Emergency Management Agency. While states and territories have 
the primary responsibility for responding to emergencies, as we get more frequent natural disasters —fires, 
cyclones, floods —due to climate change, people are increasingly looking to the national government, in times like 
that, for a response. NEMA has stepped up into that space, and the feedback from those jurisdictions has been 
extremely positive on having a Commonwealth coordinating body that is able to work with state governments, 
coordinate with the Commonwealth and make sure —whether it's in recovery or emergency —that there are 
resources going where they need to go and in a very quick fashion. I think the last figure I saw was around $170 
million —it would be a bit more now —that has been paid out by Services Australia through those crisis payments 
since ex -Cyclone Alfred occurred.  
Not only that; we've often had staff of Services Australia in the recovery centres, actually there, and many of 
them are members of their local community —so they're not only experiencing the emergency themselves; they're 
there on behalf of the Commonwealth providing assistance to people. It was an extraordinary effort, and the fact 
that there have been almost no criticisms or complaints or concerns raised goes to an example of what happens 
when you resource your Public Service properly to do the job you're asking it to do —not pretending that you can 
deliver this kind of response without the resources.  
Senator O'NEILL:   And they're skilled up, and that knowledge is a national asset — 
Senator Gallagher:   Exactly.  
Senator O'NEILL:   that sticks around for the next time we're under threat, and we can improve our processes. 
I just want to compare and contrast that with some of the behaviour we've seen from consultancies. For example, 
if a consultancy company was brought in to do the function of NEMA, even if it stood up once and it went away, 
all that knowledge would be gone. What sort of integrity they have is also important to make sure that Australian 
taxpayers get value for their money.  
This is just a shortlist of a few things we've seen about consultancies and the consultants who were getting $21 
billion and were populating out services with 54,000 of their people who were landing and expanding into the 
Public Service. Former Deloitte partner David Milo was exposed for using government documents obtained at 
Deloitte to help tender bids for his new firm, Synergy 360 . EY faced furore over work completed for the Climate 
Change Authority which made favourable findings for a US company called Verra —which was simultaneously 
its own client. BCG faced scrutiny for exorbitant fees charged for seemingly minimal work completed by the 
former New South Wales coalition. Accenture has admitted to ranking and targeting of government departments' 
officials to win contracts —which was what you were saying about how they got into the very senior levels of 
departmental decision -making —to feed their own machine, not to serve the Australian people. KPMG had to 
come clean on its internal cheating scandal, not because of Australian regulators but because the US PCAOB 
found out it was cheating on its ethics tests. McKinsey faced questions over its consultation on the Morrison 
government's net zero strategy at the same time it was representing a major fossil fuel company. Of course, that's 
all before we even get to PwC and its egregious misuse of confidential information.  
How important, given that reveal of the cultural practices across the consultancy sector, is it for Australia's 
safety and value for money for every taxpayer dollar that we do not follow the path of that proposed by Mr 
Dutton and sack 40,000 public servants?  
Senator Gallagher:   I agree with you. The work that you, Senator Pocock and Senator Colbeck have done this 
term has shone a real light on an area that hadn't had enough light shone on it for some time. I think policies like 
the average staffing cap that was put in place, which said you are not allowed to employ public servants, created 
an environment where that kind of behaviour and that kind of business model could flourish. I think it was 
expensive, it reduced capability and it infiltrated public policymaking at a level that we hadn't seen before. I don't 
think that was positive for the outcomes for the Australian people or the Public Service at the time, in terms of it Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 95 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  as an enduring institution fundamental to the health of our democracy. That's the view I have of the Public 
Service. It's not one shared by Senator McGrath and his colleagues.  
Senator O'NEILL:   Secretary Wilkinson, the cut that is currently proposed, 40,000 APS —what would the 
impact of a cut like that be on your department?  
Ms Wilkinson :  It's hard to answer that question, because, if you like, the policy detail hasn't been released. 
I'm not sure that I'm in a position — 
Senator O'NEILL:   It's inestimable because Mr Dutton still hasn't told anybody what he's actually going to 
cut. Is that it?  
Senator Gallagher:   It's difficult for officials to be answering questions like this which are inherently political 
in nature, especially on the eve of an election where this will be front and centre. We have assumed the 40,000 
people they are going to sack are the ones in jobs that they see as 'wasteful', which seem to be the new jobs that 
have been added to the Public Service since I started the work of rebuilding and reinvesting in the Public Service 
three years ago. We've taken it to be that. In that case, that would be 7,700 national security jobs, and that 
includes Defence; 5,500 jobs in the National Disability Insurance Scheme —and we just heard from Senator Hume 
that she doesn't believe eight per cent in that is sustainable, so I presume that that means further cuts from the 
opposition to the NDIS —3½ thousand jobs in Services Australia; 2,600 jobs in the ATO; and 1,300 jobs in the 
Department of Veterans' Affairs. They are the main agencies where we've provided a significant number of 
additional resources for the reasons I went through before.  
Senator O'NEILL:   Can I table a document that goes to exactly the matter that I think is focusing the attention 
of all Australians? We're in the approach to Anzac Day. Looking after veterans and remembering veterans is more 
than a one -day task for all decent Australians. Can I table this document from the Sydney Morning Herald  dated 
26 March? Thanks very much. It reports that the former coalition government cut more than $430 million from 
the Department of Veterans' Affairs, and it refers to that backlog that you were talking about —42,000. That's a 
huge number of Australian service personnel compensation claims that existed under the coalition. Is this the kind 
of outcome that Australians could reasonably expect, not just in Veterans' Affairs but across a wide range of 
frontline services, if the coalition cut those 40,000 government staff that they're saying they're going to cut?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, I would say so —without a doubt. If you don't resource Veterans' Affairs properly, 
you will not be able to process the claims. That is what we saw. It's what the royal commission saw. They had a 
close look at this. Veterans were unsupported, waiting for their claims to be allocated —not even processed but 
allocated —42,000 unallocated claims. It was an extraordinary area of neglect, and in fact I think you'll remember 
that, at the end of the last parliament, in 2022, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs —I think he actually resigned 
over it and said — 
Senator O'NEILL:   Because it was such a failure?  
Senator Gallagher:   It was because they refused to fund the staff that he needed to do the job, and that's the 
kind of Public Service those over there want to go back to.  
Senator O'NEILL:   I know that Senator Hume was defending the position this week and seemed to be 
completely oblivious to this reality that I think ordinary Australians are hearing about and are ashamed about. We 
support our veterans. We need to make sure that we look after them if they have a claim. You mentioned the 
coalition's veterans' affairs minister, Mr Gee, I believe, in your answer there.  
Senator Gallagher:   That's right.  
Senator HUME:   He's now an Independent. He actually said that there is a clear link between the backlog that 
we've been talking about and, very sadly, the despair that overcame people and the suicide rates within that 
particular community. This is a serious and disturbing question to have to ask, because there are real 
consequences when cuts seriously malign public servants. The public servants weren't able to do the job because 
they weren't there. The job didn't get done. Do you think that the cuts to the Public Service that the opposition is 
proposing are likely to risk the distress that veterans experienced then, and will that spread to other parts of the 
community, to people in crisis, if the opposition is successful in forming government? What will the impact of the 
loss of 40,000 public servants be in terms of real human cost?  
Senator Gallagher:   I think, if a measure of future performance is past performance, we would go back to 
exactly that scenario. If you're going to cut those jobs, you will not be able to process claims. Veterans will not 
get their compensation claims dealt with, and they will not get their payments. We know from the royal 
commission how stressful that was for veterans, following their service to the country, and it was just an 
appallingly shameful situation that existed. That department was not resourced properly. It was unable to do its Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 96 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  job, to the point that a minister actually resigned because the government refused —refused —to allow veterans to 
get their compensation claims. That is what happened, and that's what will happen again.  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Neill, you've had half an hour, and Senator Hume just had half an hour. I'm just going to 
do one question of my own and then come to Senator Pocock. Minister, from listening to that discussion about the 
impacts of the loss of public servants —clearly, if Australians can't access their entitlements under a Dutton 
government, that's also going to save their bottom line a lot of money, isn't it?  
Senator HUME:   A Dutton government —I love the way that sounds.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm not sure veterans would.  
CHAIR:   If it takes longer to access your entitlement — 
Senator Gallagher:   In the last couple of budgets, we've cleared the 42,000 unallocated veterans claims that 
we inherited from the former government.  
CHAIR:   That would have increased the money being paid out.  
Senator Gallagher:   We've seen big variations in the estimates of compensation payments to veterans , and 
they've been documented in the budget . I don't have the figures , but they are billions and billions of dollars , where 
payments ha ve been adjusted upwards because those claims ha ve been allocated and processed and veterans have , 
rightly , got the money that they are entitled to. That is what the former government failed to address , and i t 
appears they did that in a very conscious way. They made a decision for veterans not to have access to 
compensation. That 's the only way you can understand what they did , because they refused to resource the 
department and , because of that, the department couldn 't process the claims and , because of that , veterans didn 't 
get their compensation.  
CHAIR:   The kind s of cuts that the opposition is talking about could have similar effects across other 
portfolios , could they not? 
Senator Gallagher:   I've just been given B udget Paper No. 4:  
Since 2022, an additional $13 billion in payments to veterans has been made as a result of more claims being processed.  
That's the price that veterans were paying for Senator Hume and her colleagues ' failure to resource the 
Department of Veterans' Affairs. We actually have the price that veterans paid.  
CHAIR:   Clearly , that would translate to impacts on businesses who can't get visas processed . It could impact 
social security . There would be a range of other places where people access services or entitlements  or need to 
access government decisions  that would  also impact the economy and the wellbeing of Australians, surely . 
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. I went through that before on environmental approvals —the doubling in the number  
of on -time environmental approvals . Groups who 'd put forward proposals had been very critical of the time it took 
to get an approval because it had not been resourced properly.  Services Australia was clearly an area where 
outcomes had deteriorated once the relaxation of the COVID requirements for Centrelink was put back in place. 
But, really , the most egregious and obvious area of failure, I think —which I'll leave for the opposition to 
explain —was the neglect of Australia's veteran community.  
CHAIR:   Senator Pocock . 
Senator HUME:   Chair, come on. You just spent half an hour on — 
Senator Gallagher:   You weren't even in the room . 
Senator HUME:   No, but my colleagues were.  
CHAIR:   Senator Hume — 
Senator Gallagher:   Well, I tell you, they weren't going to ask a question. I don't know what's going on. They 
didn't have their hands up.  
CHAIR:   Senator Hume, I presume you are grateful for the fact that you were not interrupted for the half hour 
before that.  
Members of the committee  interjecting — 
Senator COLBECK:   Chair, let's go back to the statement you made earlier this morning.  
CHAIR:   Okay. Senator Pocock.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Thank you. I haven't had any minutes yet, so thanks for the go. I want to 
pick up on some of the themes  that Senator O'Neill has talked about , but I want to really focus on consultants.  
Senator O'Neill and Minister, you've walked us through the labour hir e conversion and the labour growth in key 
areas that have clearly needed it. You took a commitment to the last election to reduce spending on consultants Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 97 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  specifically , and you've repeated th is message . You've said it a number of times  since winning government,  
including in  the budget on Tuesday night —and you're nodding in agreement now. I have no doubt  that, under 
your leadership , we have seen a reduction in spending on government contracts for the big four : PwC, KPMG, 
Deloitte and EY. Looking at the Aus Tender data in front of me , it shows something like a decrease of around 28 
per cent  in spending on the big four between 2022 -23 and 2023-24. Does that sound about right as a ballpark?  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't have the figures in front of me —I'll just see if the officials can help—but t here 
definitely has been a decrease.  It's hard on AusTender, and I found this when I was asking questions of 
departments as well . AusTender  is a hard piece of infrastructure  to navigate.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I agree. It's very difficult — 
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, it's difficult to navigate and pull the information, and we would like to make it easier 
and more able to do the kinds of searches that many senators would want. Sometimes, big contracts are led in one 
year that are multi -year. That can distort that picture, so it is hard to measure it. I'll see if any — 
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Maybe we could just agree that there has been a significant decline in the 
big four take.  
Senator Gallagher:   I've definitely seen reports that would indicate that, yes.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   So let's agree that's not in doubt. What I'm concerned about is the accuracy 
and the nature or the authenticity of the claim that your government is reducing spending on consultants, more 
broadly —as a whole.  
I've struggled with the AusTender data. From what I can see, the data shows that, in 2021 -22, the last year of 
the coalition, $683 million was spent on consultants —the big four and the lot. In your first year of government, in 
2022 -23, spending was reduced by about $100 million. In the following year, the spending increased to over $600 
million again to about $643 million, from what I can see. That's almost back to the level of coalition -era spending 
on big consultants.  
Now, in 2024 -25, three -quarters of the way through the year, it seems your government is on track to spend 
around $600 million on consultants. My concern is the reduction, which I absolutely applaud —so do many of 
us—around labour and labour -hire replacement and so on. But I'm really focused on the consultants. I think the 
spend reduction there is very slight. It seems something like six per cent down on the last full year on the coalition 
level. We've heard the litany of problems with external consultants with not just the big four but more broadly. 
And I feel like the reduction there is extremely disappointing, in light of your promise to do significant things on 
this front.  
Senator Gallagher:   Again, AusTender is hard to draw like from like. I definitely struggled with that when I 
was in opposition, trying to get a handle of what was going on, because sometimes a big Defence contract will 
distort the outcome, because it might be led over a number of years. I agree. I think there's more we can do in this 
space.  
You can see some effort in this budget, where we've put in another additional year of savings from external 
labour to be applied across departments. But I agree; there's more work we can do in this space. As we rebalance 
the Public Service and rebuild capability, I think the arguments to reduce it further are stronger.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Isn't it the case that spending on consultants has actually increased  between 
2022 -23 and 2023 -24 under your government? It's gone —from my view of AusTender —from $588 million to 
$643 million. That's a significant increase in consulting. It's not quite back to coalition levels, but it's a very flat 
picture.  
Mr Windeyer :  I've got slightly different numbers here, but that actually goes to the AusTender point in the 
timing of drawing out the data. There are a whole lot of things going on here, including large consultancy firm 
contracts, totally; large consultancy firms, consultants; and consultant contracts and whether they're appropriately 
labelled. I think you pointed it out before. There is a significant decline in the total number of contracts going to 
the big four. I've actually got a number of the big six — 
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   That's not my question.  
Mr Windeyer :  You're right. There is movement and, between the last two years, there has been an increase in 
the consultancy contracts as recorded on AusTender. What I don't have is what that looks like for the big four, 
specifically.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   To me, the bucket of money that is going to the consulting sector looks very 
flat over your years of government. There isn't a significant, steady decline. There's a shift in who's doing the 
work. It's very welcome that we see smaller and medium -sized consultants at that table and fewer of the big four. Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 98 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  But the cut that we need in consulting and the rebuilding that you've talked about of our core functions: 
preparation of cabinet documents, for heaven's sake —all those things.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Can I just say one thing. We do need to keep in mind that, if it's flat in nominal dollar terms, it 
would be falling as a percentage of, say, total payments in the system. All I can say is that within individual 
departments there's no question that there's very genuine consideration given to where you can and should use 
consultants and contractors. To give you an example in the context of the responsibilities we have for the national 
security precinct, there are clearly some functions there that we think are very sensible to contract out, and then 
we have, very deliberately, decided to build internal capability to do other functions, which otherwise, in previous 
building exercises, have been done by external contractors.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I recognise what you're saying: the total spend is increasing; the share may 
diminish. It's still a disappointing picture, given the egregious behaviour that we've seen and that we know we 
need to change in our public sector —dependence on people who don't do the right thing when they do the work.  
In the 2024 budget estimates, I asked you, Minister, how much of the $1 billion in savings on consultants, 
contractors and labour hire in the last budget would be due to reduced spending on consultants. You said:  
That'll be up to the individual entities. Centrally, we are saying that this is the money that we will be removing. Our view is 
that it can come from various sources … So it could be through reductions  in labour  hire or consultants or contractors. But, 
ultimately, that's a matter for the secretary of each department.  
So a very devolved model of reduction is underway.  
Senator Gallagher:   It's the way the PGPA Act works.  
Ms Wilkinson :  It's a devolved model of financial management.  
Senator Gallagher:   The accountable authority is the secretary.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I understand that that's what's happening. Just to clarify, if no departments 
or agencies decided to cut consultant spending and found savings elsewhere in their budgets, in those other —
labour hire, for example —categories, would that be an acceptable response for you?  
Senator Gallagher:   Under the law, they are responsible for the appropriation that they're provided as 
secretaries. Obviously, they have discussions with their ministers. We've made very clear what we think and 
expect in this area, particularly where we are providing additional ASL for them to reduce their reliance on 
consultants and contractors. Again, you'll have large, lumpy bits in areas like Defence —but not only Defence; I 
don't want to say it's all them. In my experience, most departments have taken that pretty seriously, and we see it 
reflected in their own budgets. We remove the money. It is not as if it's a discretionary — 
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I'm not contesting the labour hires. I'm focusing on the consulting side. It 
seems to me there's no real mechanism —other than exhortation —to get people to shift their dependence on 
consultants. It's not reflected in the numbers. I think that mechanism needs to be there if we're going to see a 
systemic, significant decline in the consulting budget. Do you recognise the absence of a mechanism to drive that 
in this devolved model?  
Senator Gallagher:   I think there's an ongoing role to understand what's happening with our workforce and to 
understand what changes have happened over time. Again, we're not going to rebuild the Public Service in one 
term. We've provided it with the resourcing. Rebuilding the Public — 
Senator Hume interjecting — 
Senator Gallagher:   Senator Hume, I know you don't understand the Public Service or value it, but rebuilding 
the Public Service is not simply about additional ASL. There is a whole range of other work, which you have 
chosen to ignore this term, that goes into ensuring that the APS can be as strong as it can be. And it will take 
longer to rebuild, after a decade of neglect from you — 
Senator HUME:   Wow, there'll be more than 41,000.  
Senator Gallagher:   in making sure that the APS is properly resourced. As I have said a number of times, I 
think the level of resourcing is appropriate.  
Senator HUME:   You said that at 36,000.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, and we've converted thousands of your labour hire workers into public servants. So 
they were being paid for, Jane; they were just more expensive.  
Senator HUME:   Six billion dollars a year it's costing.  
Senator Gallagher:   They were more expensive, and you didn't mind that at all.  
Senator HUME:   They're not. It's only saved $700 million, and you've spent $6 billion.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 99 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Anyhow, moving right along — 
Senator Gallagher:   Senator Hume, I've written to you today seeking a debate on the Public Service, so I look 
forward to you accepting that and I particularly look forward to doing it in Canberra, where you and your 
colleagues demonised the Public Service. I think if your plans are to sack 40,000 — 
Senator HUME:   Will the CPSU be in attendance?  
Senator Gallagher:   Canberra based public servants then the least you can do is front up — 
Senator HUME:   Why don't you give them a pay rise?  
Senator Gallagher:   and explain your position to them. If you think this is the way to go on the Public Service, 
front up, have a debate with me and explain to people why you think 40,000 public servants should be sacked.  
Senator HUME:   Six billion dollars a year!  
Senator Gallagher:   I look forward to your positive response to that.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I'll come back to consulting. The 2024 update on the APS Strategic 
Commissioning Framework —page 6, table 6 —says that only one per cent of savings by departments on 
outsourcing has come from reduced contracting of consultants. So it's a really tiny proportion. Isn't it the case that 
the strategic commissioning framework, which I support, is not actually delivering on consulting spending 
specifically?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, we didn't have a strategic commissioning framework —that was our point. You had 
no guidance under the former government. There was no value placed on the work public servants should do as 
core responsibilities and the work that should be available for consultants. We have put in place that strategic 
commissioning framework and we will continue to ensure that agencies are looking to that. They already are. I 
know from discussions that I have —I know Secretary Wilkinson sits on the Secretaries Board —that this is seen 
as a priority of the government, and we expect there to be change.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   I guess my point is really focusing on consultants. The change is there, we 
see that reduction; we don't see it in relation to consultancy. In the event that it continues like this, with only one 
per cent of all those reductions being in consulting, would you consider a stronger approach? For example, if we 
were setting targets for the employment of women and no -one did anything beyond being exhorted to do it, we 
would certainly, I imagine, consider action that provoked real change. Would your government consider a 
stronger approach —for example, setting a target of reducing spending on consultants specifically, such as by 15 
per cent a year for five years? Would it consider setting some KPIs that would require that reduction and drive the 
change we need to see?  
Senator Gallagher:   I see it as ongoing work. We'll have more to say over the next few weeks about our 
expectations in that area, but it is a long piece of work and it's important that we get it right. I think we've started 
to rebalance the Public Service, but there is, as you point out, more to be done to change a culture where 
outsourcing or getting in contractors or consultants were seen as the only ways to do your work.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   In the budget, your government indicates savings of $718 million from 
further reducing spending on consultants, contractors and labour hire; however, the forward estimates table shows 
the entire $718 million in only the last year.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, because it's an additional year of an existing save. If you remember, we went to the 
last election with a save on consultants and contractors that was implemented over —four years, was it?  
Ms Patterson :  Five years.  
Senator Gallagher:   Five years, in the end. And this is adding in another year of that. Essentially, we're 
keeping the pressure on by saying that we expect that to continue.  
Ms Wilkinson :  The earlier years are all in existing departmental budgets, and this is the increment.  
Senator BARBARA POCOCK:   Okay. Thanks for explaining that.  
Senator HUME:   I want to ask some questions about decisions taken but not yet announced. Budget Paper 2, 
page 2, shows the receipts decisions taken but not yet announced. I am just adding up 'decisions taken but not yet 
announced and not for publication (nfp)' in table 1 to an aggregate of $468.9 million. You might want to double -
check my maths. That is 2025 -26 through to 2028 -29. That includes an increase in receipts, I should say, of 
$133.9 million next year and then the following three years. Then, on page 19, we've got the impact of the 
payments, decisions taken but not yet announced and NFPs. For the same period, there's about $1.5 billion. 
Again, I am just checking my maths. For the sake of Hansard, they're nodding. That's good.  
Ms Patterson :  Yes. Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 100 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   You've taken decisions to increase revenue by nearly $470 million —let's call it that —over 
the forward estimates and to increase payments by $1.5 billion over the same period, but they have to be 
announced before PEFO, and, if not, they are going to be reflected in PEFO regardless. Is that right?  
Ms Patterson :  For the things that are decisions taken but not yet announced, that is correct. Either they will be 
announced before PEFO or we will announce them in PEFO. Obviously, there are some things in there that are 
not for publication, as per the Charter of Budget Honesty and the requirements around PEFO. Some of those 
things obviously won't be revealed, because they will continue to be NFP.  
Senator HUME:   Okay. But governments can also use the funding set aside in the contingency reserve —I 
know we had this conversation last time —to announce policies without impact to the budget bottom line. Is that 
correct?  
Ms Patterson :  Those decisions are reflected. They are reflected in the contingency reserve subfunction, in the 
expenses part of BP No. 1, but they will also appear in the payment variations. So they are built into the bottom 
line; it's just that they are not revealed.  
Senator HUME:   Okay. The contingency reserve in BP 1 is on page 143, and I'm just calculating —again, I'm 
just getting the aggregate of the contingency reserve there —it is $40.8 billion.  
Ms Patterson :  Yes. 
Senator HUME:   Okay.  
Ms Patterson :  Noting that, as we've been through previously —and I think we've answered a question on 
notice to you —obviously a fairly big component of that is the conservative bias allowance.  
Senator HUME:   Yes, the conservative bias allowance. On page 144, I've just added up the bullet points there, 
and the conservative bias allowance is $26.1 billion. It's the total of $3.5 billion, $7.3 billion and $15.3 billion.  
Ms Wilkinson :  That's right.  
Senator HUME:   Okay. Last estimates we discussed that the government is able to make or finalise decisions 
that have been funded from within the broader contingency reserve. Is that right?  
Ms Patterson :  Yes. 
Senator HUME:   Ms Patterson, at that time, you said that 'provisioned in the budget books' is essentially code 
for contingency reserve.  
Ms Patterson :  Both 'decisions taken but not yet announced' and 'estimates provisions'. For example, in our 
previous budgets, the government has indicated that they had made a provision for things like responding to the 
National Cabinet agreements around hospitals and the NDIS. So both 'decisions taken but not yet announced' and 
'provisions for future expenditure' sit in the contingency reserve.  
Senator HUME:   Right. Suddenly I've got two pens. I must be very important and busy! Minister, you said 
that you had made provisions where details were yet to be finalised, and when you announced those policies you 
said they were provisioned for.  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't know what you're talking about  specifically.  
Senator HUME:   Well, there have been a number of announcements. I think you specifically said at the last 
estimates that you had made provisions where details were yet to be finalised, but then those policies were 
provisioned for.  
Senator Gallagher:   Mm.  
Senator HUME:   Yes? So there's about $15 billion, from my calculation —it's just under that; it's $14.74 
billion over the forwards —that essentially you're able to spend in the lead -up to the release of PEFO. Is that right?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Well, no. It's provisioning for future spending that you are going to have to do, so —for 
example, future national agreements on health, or — 
Senator Gallagher:   With states and territories.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Agreements with states and territories. There are always provisions held for Commonwealth -
state agreements which are still under negotiation, so those have to be provisioned for. Then there are 
commercial -in-confidence and national -security -in-confidence items. The list on the bottom of page 144 lists all 
of the things that get captured in the contingency reserve , and , of course, the purpose of capturing all of these is to 
ensure that the budget bottom line reflects what is likely or expected to be a cost for government.  
Senator HUME:   Knowing that then, can  you give us a vague indication of what might be included in the 
$14.74 billion.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 101 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   I think we have. We've given you  examples of what might be held in the contingency 
reserve, but the reason it 's there is that those matters haven't been finalised.  
Ms Patterson :  While, obviously, there's not every item  in the PEFO,  there will be categories that are spelt out 
in the P EFO that will give an indication , for example , of the quantum of the contingency reserve that has been set 
aside for , say, big national partnership agreements.  
Senator HUME:   Big national what?  
Ms Patterson :  For national partnership agreements.  
Ms Wilkinson :  For Com -state agreements.  
Ms Patterson :  Com -state agreements —things like hospitals, foundational supports and schools.  
Ms Wilkinson :  But, of course, that has  to be revealed in a way that doesn't mean compromise to negotiations 
which a future government would have around any of these agreements.  
Senator HUME:   So it's not for election commitments ? 
Ms Wilkinson :  It gives you a quantum that what gets revealed there around the Com -states agreements is the  
quantum which  has been allowed for across all of the small and large  Com -state agreements which  are under 
negotiation.  
Senator HUME:   So it's not for election  commitments?  
Senator Gallagher:   It's responsible budgeting . It's knowing that you will have cost s that are going to  come 
and providing a reasonable provision for those while you  finalise negotiation s. 
Senator HUME:   So it's not for election commitments ? 
Senator Gallagher:   I think if you look at — 
Senator HUME:   It's the t hird time I 've asked.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, you  didn't disclose exactly what was in the contingency reserve and the size and 
what it was exactly for , and we — 
Senator HUME:   I'm not  asking any of those questions ; I just want to know it's not for election commitments.  
Senator Gallagher:   And I am saying to you , Senator Hume, that  we have budgeted responsibly  for costs that 
we expect future governments will have to make funding commitments for , and  that is contained in the 
contingency reserve . On the decisions taken but not yet announced , you will notice that is quite a bit smaller than 
most pre -election budget  provisions , so I think that  gives you an indication.  
Senator HUME:   Yes. I remember that conversation after MYEFO —in fact, I think it was a journalist  that 
might have asked the Treasurer —about the size of the 'decisions taken but not yet announced ' line, and he said : 
'Yes, it was very modest, and that would give you an indication that it was going to be a modest spending election 
campaign. ' But it hasn't been so far , so I'm wondering — 
Senator Gallagher:   I don't accept that.  
Senator HUME:   where else you're finding the pot of gold.  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't accept that at all. I think , where we 've made commitments, they have been 
reflect ed and accommodated in the budget that 's been published.  
Senator HUME:   There ha ve been an awful  lot of things that have been committed to so far — 
Senator Gallagher:   Well, you've matched most of them, Senator Hume.  
Senator HUME:   that apparently have been provisioned.  
Senator Gallagher:   So you're criticising things that you're now matching.  
Senator HUME:   I'm interested to know where they are, if they've been provisioned, because they obviously 
weren't in  the decisions taken but not yet announced , because you overcooked that . 
Senator Gallagher:   I don't know what you're talking about there. We have made provisions , and  then, when 
we finalise d those , whether it be in MYEFO  or a previous budget  and they've been  finalise d, they appear in the 
budget.  
Senator HUME:   Alright. Do you expect any of the contingency reserve provisions to be announced prior to 
PEFO? Are there  more?  
Senator Gallagher:   The decisions taken but not yet announced will be — 
Senator HUME:   I think we've done those and then some.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 102 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   either beforehand or at PEFO. 
Senator HUME:   Anything more  from the CR ? 
Senator Gallagher:   We don't usually disclose what 's in the CR . That's the difficulty we 're having. If you 're 
asking me : 'Is there a big election fund in the CR ?' the answer to that is no.  
Senator HUME:   PEFO will make that clear , won't it ? 
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. 
Senator HUME:   Yes. Can I ask about the deficit ? The d eficit for 2025 -26 is essentially unchanged from the 
forecast in PEFO. It's $ 42.1 billion compared to $42.9 billion.  The question is, how is it possible for the 
government to claim it has found $94 billion in savings, in addition to the almost $400 billion in unexpected 
revenue uplifts, and then still have a deficit that is the same as it was forecast to be three years ago?  
Senator Gallagher:   The savings have been listed in every budget, so that's how we get to that figure. They are 
accounted for and cumulative. As you would know, compared to what we inherited, we have delivered two 
surpluses, we've halved the deficit in the 2024 -25 year. The 2025 -26 year is slightly improved, and over the 
forward estimates there has been a slight improvement since MYEFO. Every year is better than the year we 
inherited, and we have done that through a mix of returning revenue to the budget, lowering debt, lowering 
interest payments on that debt, and repairing the budget over time. We will continue that work should we win the 
election and be fortunate enough to serve in these roles again.  
Senator HUME:   I know you have spoken about this before —the concept of banking receipt upgrades. It 
implies that you know how large they will be and are choosing not to spend them. But isn't it the case that most 
spending decisions are taken well before the final receipt numbers are known?  
Senator Gallagher:   That would go to advice to government, I would think, in the form of our ERC 
deliberations. The Treasurer would be briefed, and we are conscious of all of the pressures coming at us. What's 
happening with revenue —we report those monthly financial reports. There is quite a lot of information that comes 
through as you are working, and the reality is we have banked 69 per cent of all revenue upgrades back into the 
budget and not spent.  
Senator HUME:   But not for the 2025 -26 year?  
Senator Gallagher:   That's over the term of government. That's when we have had upward revisions.  
Senator HUME:   So you've run out?  
Senator Gallagher:   There have been very slight upward revisions since MYEFO and this budget, and 
winding back in the last budget.  
Senator HUME:   When you make the spending decisions, are they contingent on a particular amount of 
receipt upgrades?  
Senator Gallagher:   We set our fiscal plan as showing restraint, making sure we were banking those upward 
revisions to revenue. It's hard to separate the two. You get a lot of information through ERC, and some of the 
things that we've had to do —like the unavoidable spending —we had to do that spending regardless of what's 
happening on the revenue front. We're mindful, yes. The ERC makes decisions across the whole budget that 
includes revenue and expenditure.  
Senator HUME:   If there hadn't been the receipt upgrades, would any of the spending decisions have not gone 
ahead?  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't know how you would answer that question.  
Senator HUME:   It's discipline, isn't it? What if there were receipt downgrades?  
Senator Gallagher:   If this didn't happen, would you have done that? We have made decisions based on the 
information we have at the time, in the national interest.  
Senator HUME:   But don't you make the spending decisions before you understand  what receipts will come 
in? 
Ms Wilkinson :  The way I would put it is that through the ERC process —which usually spans a couple of 
months, quite often three months —there are a series of updates that are provided to ERC about the economic 
outlook and about what's happening to the monthly financial indicators the minister mentioned. Parameters like 
commodity prices change, the exchange rate changes, and it's not unusual, in every ERC I have been involved in, 
for ERC to have a strategic discussion at the beginning of many ERC meetings to ask where we are up to, and 
how things are looking. It's a much more iterative process. I don't think it's an accurate characterisation in any Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 103 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  budget process I've been involved in to say there are a lot of decisions which are locked -in and then you get 
another lot of receipts.  
Senator Gallagher:   And then you make it work.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Yes. It's much more iterative through the process. You get a sense of what's happening too. To 
be honest, this goes on both sides —what is the news that's coming through on the payment side as well as what is 
the news that's coming through on the receipt side and how are some of the driving parameters changing over 
time.  
Senator HUME:   Is there —sorry, Minister?  
Senator Gallagher:   I was only going to add in that some of the big movements come through estimates 
variations. If there are more people on social security or getting veterans claims —the big movements are in 
veterans affairs —they come into that as well, as you're making other decisions. As the secretary said, it's very 
iterative, but you get a lot of advice about what's happening on all aspects of the budget pretty much from the first 
meeting.  
Senator HUME:   So there isn't —or maybe there is and I don't know it —a government policy to limit spending 
in a way that there's a minimum proportion of receipt upgrades that are returned to the bottom line?  
Senator Gallagher:   Again, I don't know how we're going to disclose —the ERC has to consider every aspect 
of the budget. I don't know that there's a way to kind of — 
Senator HUME:   There's not a rule or a reward.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, we have fiscal rules, and we have budget process operational rules which I know 
you've had interest in in the past, and that goes through all of that. The ERC considers submissions, whether they 
be for additional spending or reprioritising or whatever it might be, against those rules. Over a period of time, we 
really didn't stop, from MYEFO to this budget —and a couple of months before MYEFO. We've probably been in 
budget consideration from September to March. That's six months. A lot has happened in the world. We weren't 
really thinking about the impact of global trade wars in September. Now, that has been a feature of some of our 
thinking and consideration and advice. It changes over time.  
What we've put a premium on is spending that has to happen —that is, what we see as unavoidable —dealing 
with some of those terminating measures and how they come up, and then, I guess, seeing what room there is to 
provide sensible and responsible investments in other areas where it's clear that there is further need. There's 
plenty of that in this budget as well. If you take health, we're seeking to deal with some of the pressures in health, 
whether they be in hospitals or in primary care. It's clearly on a policy level —you've backed it in too, so you've 
obviously recognised that there is a policy need to invest additional resources in primary care — 
Senator HUME:   Bulk -billing collapsed, so we've had to.  
Senator Gallagher:   and we've done that.  
Senator HUME:   Can I be very clear then. There isn't a policy to limit spending so that a minimum proportion 
of receipt upgrades are returned to the bottom line. That's not in your BPORs and it's not in your fiscal strategy, so 
that's not one of the rules that you use.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm telling you we have rules — 
Senator HUME:   But that's not one of them. That's fine.  
Senator Gallagher:   We have fiscal rules, we have the budget process operational rules and then we have 
months and months of advice from departments and we take decisions.  
Senator HUME:   In his budget speech, the Treasurer said that the government had found $2 billion of savings 
this budget. Can I be very clear. Was that in 2025 -26 or was it over the forwards?  
Senator Gallagher:   It's over the forwards.  
Senator HUME:   What were the big items that made up that $2 billion?  
Senator Gallagher:   We can go through that. The single biggest component is the additional year of savings 
on external labour, on consultants and contractors, that we have put in place. That's over $700 million. Then there 
was a mix of programs in social services, where they're reprioritising, in defence and in climate change, where 
they are reprioritising existing expenditure into new programs or new priorities. I think there was a bit in the IAS 
as well, from memory —from the Indigenous Advancement Strategy.  
Senator HUME:   This year, you found $2 billion in savings and reprioritisation, but your own budget figures 
on page 66 of BP 1 in table 3.3 show that policy decisions since MYEFO —not even since budget —are $7.141 
billion. Is that right? 'Effect of policy decisions.'  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 104 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   Yes. You can see that on page 66, as you say. That's an additional top -up to the provision 
we've made for health care . Then we go through cheaper medicines, energy bill rebates, some additional funding 
for the National Health Reform Agreement, more medicines on the PBS, and the additional resourcing as part of 
the finalisation of the Better and Fairer Schools Agreement.  
Senator HUME:   How can you claim offsets in savings if you've got that kind of ledger —$2 billion in savings 
but $7.1 billion of new policy decisions since MYEFO?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, they are savings. They're separate — 
Senator HUME:   They're just reprioritisations, aren't they?  
Senator Gallagher:   No. 
Senator HUME:   You're saving money on one thing but putting it towards another?  
Senator Gallagher:   No, they are separate. On the one hand, you're talking about additional spending. Yes, 
there is additional spending, but, at the same time, we have provided more room in the budget for a number of 
things that you have, in fact, agreed with and copied in that $7 billion. Aside from that, there is $2.1 billion in 
savings.  
Senator HUME:   When I was out in the private sector, I used to work with an economist named Shane Oliver. 
He was very good. I noticed he was on telly the other day, and he said that the government was on track to spend 
96 per cent of the revenue upgrade since December's mid -year budget update. He said:  
I am amazed that the Treasurer is saying they have done all this hard work, but really it's like they have won the Lotto.  
He also said:  
This is not good management; it's good luck.  
Is that independent character assessment wrong?  
Senator Gallagher:   I've said a number of times that economists have a lot of views  and they put them in the 
media frequently. Some I agree with; some I don't agree with. I'll leave it to the commentators to commentate. My 
job and Dr Chalmers' job are to balance — 
Senator HUME:   Spin it.  
Senator Gallagher:   No. It's to balance up a whole range of competing pressures on a budget and respond in 
the most careful, methodical and thoughtful way that delivers services to the people of Australia, that deals with 
cost-of-living pressures and that repairs the budget over time. That is exactly what we have been doing for four 
budgets.  
Senator HUME:   I want to ask you about some of these unavoidable spends. Page 60 of your budget paper, 
addressing unavoidable issues, states:  
The Government has had to provide $3.5 billion over five years to 2028 -29 for unavoidable policy decisions since MYEFO.  
It then goes through some examples. What's the rubric for what is considered 'unavoidable'?  
Senator Gallagher:   I can take you through them if you want.  
Senator HUME:   No, I just want the rubric. I don't need you to go through each item.  
Senator Gallagher:   'Unavoidable', in my view, is if you don't do something —say, if you don't continue to 
fund it —it would have a significant impact. Either there are poor service outcomes, a service doesn't get funded, 
an ICT program falls over or an investment that had been put in for 10 years is wasted —that type of thing. We see 
it as unavoidable. That is, we'd prefer, in some cases, that we didn't have to do it. In some of the ICT programs we 
inherited from you, like business registers and things like that. That has been an absolute shocker; that has 
required more investment. But, if we don't do it, there is a lot of sunk investment into that, and it would be the 
wrong outcome.  
Senator HUME:   I have to put my hand on my heart here and say that I am very passionate about the 
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. I notice that you've got amended listings there and new and amended items on 
the Medicare Benefits Schedule. As you know, we have said before that we support this expenditure, but why is it 
characterised as 'unavoidable'?  
Senator Gallagher:   Because there are recommendations to government that these should be funded.  
Senator HUME:   But every policy is a recommendation to government.  
Senator Gallagher:   So, when we get a recommendation about new medication listings, should we just say, 
'Oh, no, that's avoidable —we're not doing that'?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 105 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   You did in the last government. In the last Labor government, you didn't list a single 
product.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm not responsible for what previous governments did. As the finance minister, I'm 
responsible for this budget, and I see that as unavoidable expenditure. I leave it open to you if you want to provide 
that as more discretionary and open to your decision -making.  
Senator HUME:   We've said that we support it; it's just how it's categorised. To be honest, if that were my 
decision, I would own it. I would own it.  
Senator Gallagher:   It's a term I use when I'm looking at spending.  
Senator HUME:   The budget's used it.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, well, we write the budget.  
Senator HUME:   I know, but Finance have signed off on it. It's just a very strange way to express what is 
clearly a policy decision. Don't get me wrong; I agree with the policy decision. I'd own it.  
Senator Gallagher:   I would love to sit here on the eve of an election campaign that's going to kick off in the 
next few weeks and argue with you about the definition of what 'unavoidable' stands for! If that is really the main 
game for you, then let's set aside the next five hours to go through whether you view something as unavoidable or 
I view it as unavoidable!  
Senator HUME:   I've got so many things to talk about in the next five hours. It's just about the way you frame 
decisions, isn't it?  
Senator Gallagher:   It is an expenditure pressure that I believe is unavoidable —that is, it's not really open to 
government to say no to it.  
Senator HUME:   The 2011 -12 Portfolio Budget Statements said that 'the listing of some medicines' would be 
'deferred until fiscal circumstances permit'. That was your government that said that. It was your government.  
Senator Gallagher:   I wasn't a part of — 
Senator HUME:   Labor governments in the past have avoided this unavoidable pressure, so why is it that you 
have decided this?  
Senator Gallagher:   Okay, whoa! I'm being knocked over by the big questions — 
Senator HUME:   I've got more.  
Senator Gallagher:   about a government that I wasn't a member of, that I wasn't even serving in the 
parliament of and that is now 14 years old! How about we fast forward to 2025 and start asking about this budget? 
I am very happy to defend our interpretation, or our definition, of what we see as unavoidable spending.  
Senator HUME:   Alright, this is a good question. The second item you have listed here is:  
… addressing unavoidable cost pressures for projects in the Infrastructure Investment Program, including the Bruce Highway -
Rockhampton Ring Road in Queensland, Barwon Heads Road Upgrade -Stage 2 in Victoria and Homebush Bay Drive in New 
South Wales.  
Again, if they were unavoidable, why weren't they funded in the last budget?  
Senator Gallagher:   Because the states come back —again, if you've sat in the ERC, you would know that 
during every budget update there is ongoing work between the infrastructure minister and her state and territory 
colleagues around what is happening with infrastructure and ongoing projects, usually ones that are well 
underway and under construction. We've seen in the last few years that there have been cost pressures on those 
projects, and the Commonwealth as a funder, or co -funder, of those projects has a shared responsibility to meet 
some of those cost pressures. You could argue that that's avoidable, but that may mean that you have a project 
that's seven -eighths finished, like a road that stops a kilometre earlier than it is meant to. We see that as 
unavoidable. They're cost pressures on current programs put to us by the states.  
Senator HUME:   On that, the third item you've got here is:  
… program funding to support the Illicit Tobacco Compliance and Enforcement Package, focused on sustained disruption of 
the illicit trade in tobacco and associated nicotine products.  
Again, this one is quite extraordinary. Don't get me wrong; I agree with it. In my home state of Victoria, there are 
serious organised crime elements involved in the illicit tobacco trade, and there's escalating violence that's 
associated with it. But, given the government's failure to address organised crime that's benefiting from the illicit 
tobacco trade, while I agree that this funding is a priority, is it actually unavoidable? You avoided it last year. If it 
was unavoidable, why wasn't it in last year's budget?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 106 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   Again, I'm really thrilled to spend the evening talking to you about your definition of 
'unavoidable' versus mine! This is advice presented to government —and we have seen, in this budget, a 
significant decline in tobacco excise, I think, in the order of between $6 billion and $7 billion —that additional 
expenditure to deal with that and ensure enforcement and compliance is necessary.  
Senator HUME:   So was it an issue last year?  
Senator Gallagher:   I can only answer about the information that we have had in this budget round. I can't 
recall — 
Senator HUME:   So no -one spoke to you about illicit tobacco and organised crime last year?  
Senator Gallagher:   What I'm telling you is we have responded to information provided to us in this budget 
round, and we see that as unavoidable and necessary spending.  
Senator HUME:   Essentially, if anybody who pitches a really good idea to you that sounds compelling, it 
becomes an unavoidable spend — 
Senator Gallagher:   No, it doesn't.  
Senator HUME:   and you categorise it that way, which makes it sound like it's — 
Senator Gallagher:   No. I totally disagree. You can see that it — 
Senator HUME:   But that spending wasn't in last year's budget.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'll just say 10 per cent of the net policy decisions in this budget have been explained as 
unavoidable. So the proposition that you've just put is not the case.  
Senator HUME:   Do you think it's a bit of spin? It's helpful spin, isn't it? It really is very helpful spin.  
Senator Gallagher:   No. 
Senator HUME:   It's worked a couple of years in a row, but I think the spin's wearing thin.  
Senator Gallagher:   I can go through the areas we inherited when we came to government because — 
Senator HUME:   Are you not proud of the decisions? Surely, you should just own them.  
Senator Gallagher:   there's a much bigger chunk of expenditure that we've had to pay to deal with your lack 
of responsible budgeting where you did not make any provision or any ongoing funding for a number of programs 
that were clearly ongoing.  
Senator HUME:   Is this about the terminating measures? Is that what you'd like to talk about? Because we can 
talk about a few of those as well.  
Senator Gallagher:   We would put those in the same area.  
Senator HUME:   I'm looking forward to seeing your terminating measures. If you are so convinced that these 
are 'unavoidable' but you're very proud of the decisions that you have made to take them, why not just own them 
and say, 'These are decisions my government has made because they are important,' rather than saying they're 
unavoidable and shrugging your shoulders as if they're not your responsibility?  
Senator Gallagher:   Is this really your big — 
Senator HUME:   I'm just interested in the categorisation.  
Senator Gallagher:   Is this really your big criticism of the budget? We've gone to — 
Senator HUME:   Well, it's part of your pitch, isn't it?  
Senator Gallagher:   Come on!  
Senator HUME:   You're saying: 'Oh, woe is me! They're unavoidable decisions. I'm too weak to say 'no', so 
they're unavoidable decisions.' That's what it is, isn't it?  
Senator Gallagher:   You can categorise me as weak, Senator Hume. I'm very comfortable with how I 
undertake my role, how I deal with my colleagues and how I respond to pressures in the budget, but, by all means, 
go personal and use language that I noticed others have used in the paper today. It's good to see you read the Fin. 
But I do my job as well as I can do my job. I say 'no' probably a thousand times more than I say 'yes', and this 
page reflects decisions that we believe are unavoidable.  
Senator HUME:   Did you agonise then over any of those decisions? Or were they just, 'Oh, well'?  
Senator Gallagher:   I'll stand on my record; it's pretty transparent. You obviously have a different view, not 
that I care about that that much, and, if you want to go out, champion that and carry on about that in the election 
campaign, I imagine there'll be about five people that find the difference in definitions of 'unavoidable spending' 
in a budget  interesting.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 107 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   We must do a little search — 
Senator Gallagher:   It's a pretty niche area.  
Senator HUME:   for how often you have said the words 'unavoidable spending', because it's part of your 
patois.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, it's because I believe very strongly that you didn't budget responsibly and that you 
went around pretending that you were responsible budgeters and then we came in and found there were a whole 
load of things that weren't funded. You kept the out years looking better because you didn't acknowledge the 
spending that would need to happen in those out years. We've taken a different approach, a more honest approach, 
where we have explained when there is spending that needs to be undertaken, like My Health Record and the 
business registers —all the places like that which really aren't things that we had accommodated for or thought 
we'd have to find funding for that we have found room for.  
Senator HUME:   Can you name three things that you've said 'no' to?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, I could name more than three. I'm not going to talk to you about the things I've said 
'no' to, Senator Hume.  
Senator HUME:   It's just you said that you say 'no' like a thousand times for every time you say 'yes', and I'm 
just wondering if you could name three off the top of your head.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm not going to go into the discussions I have with my colleagues, but I can assure you 
that my colleagues  have a lot of ideas because they are hardworking ministers who want to do a lot of things. We 
can fund a very small percentage of them, and that is what the ERC's job is. It's to work through all of that and 
identify the priorities. We've made it clear what those are. You've copied most of them, so I presume your people 
feel the same way, and I'm very comfortable in the role that I have played and the strength that I have brought to 
that role.  
Senator HUME:   Okay, thank you.  
CHAIR:   We will now break for dinner.  
Proceedings suspended from 19:14 to 20:19  
CHAIR:   We are resuming our hearing with the Department of Finance. Senator Hume?  
Senator HUME:   Senator McGrath has some questions.  
Senator McGRATH:   Under what circumstances would Finance adopt significant changes in the Pre -election 
Economic and Fiscal Outlook compared to budget, including economic parameters in expenditure or receipts that 
have been accounted for incorrectly?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Was the question 'under what circumstances'? The Charter of Budget Honesty is very clear 
about what my obligations and the Secretary to the Treasury's obligations are in relation to what has to be 
included in PEFO. We have to provide our honest and best assessment of both the economic parameters and what 
the fiscal implications are. Typically, if you look at PEFOs over the period since they've been in place, when a 
budget is brought down there are relatively small changes from the bottom line because, of course, when a budget 
is brought down just before an election is called there's usually a pretty small gap between the budget and PEFO. 
But it will include decisions which were taken after the budget was landed. I think there was one where there was 
some disaster spending, which was decided after the budget had been brought down but before the writs had been 
issued. As we talked about earlier, PEFOs, while they don't affect the bottom line, have typically revealed 
information in the budget —like decisions taken but not announced which are in the budget. They have been in the 
bottom line, but it just provides additional transparency around that detail.  
So, when a budget update and a PEFO are close, generally it's a pretty exceptional circumstance that would 
lead to a difference in the outcome, but it would be revealed transparently.  
Senator McGRATH:   I suppose we might be facing such a circumstance in that President Trump has said that 
2 April will be 'freedom day'. That may have significant tariff announcements that could impact us and our 
trading partners. I know we don't do hypotheticals, but I think it's certain to fall within the 10 days in which the 
PEFO can be released. Is it possible that the economic impact of those tariffs would be significant enough to 
warrant inclusion?  
Ms Wilkinson :  As you say, it's a hypothetical question. It's very hard to answer that without knowing the 
details of what is announced. It's also a question that would be a matter for Treasury. Treasury will determine 
whether there's any change in the economic parameters that could be required. One thing that the budget 
documents do but also one thing that would be an option in circumstances like this —there might be an Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 108 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  announcement, but it might take some time to understand the details of that announcement and/or determine what 
the implications of that announcement are for the economy more broadly. As the Treasurer has pointed out, when 
you try and think about the economic implications of an announcement around tariffs, you have to think about the 
direct impacts as well as the indirect impacts, so that's reasonably complicated. I'd be nervous committing 
Treasury at this point. You can certainly ask them tomorrow, but I'd be nervous committing them to exactly what 
they could do within the timeframe that's available to us, because we have to issue PEFO within 10 days of the 
writs being issued. But there could be room to at least highlight the risks that it presents. Potentially, some 
sensitivity would be possible. But, yes, we'll have to give careful consideration to this.  
Senator McGRATH:   I suppose —to assist us with transparency —this building seems to be of the opinion that 
the Prime Minister's going to call an election tomorrow morning, and we may not, sadly, have a chance to put 
these questions to Treasury. You touched upon this, but how would you capture the timing of the announcement 
in relation to what may happen on 2 April, in relation to the PEFO?  
Ms Wilkinson :  What was the question again?  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm concerned about the timing, because, as you touched on in your answer —and I 
realise this is more for Treasury, but we're having a conversation here —how can you give effect to such a 
significant announcement by President Trump that may happen on 2 April? You mentioned in your answer that 
you may not know all the details and you may need more time, but is there a way that you could give effect to it?  
Ms Wilkinson :  It's very hard for me to say without knowing the details. We have the legal obligation to issue 
PEFO within 10 days of the writs being issued. We have to meet that timeframe, and Steven Kennedy  and I have 
to think about the most appropriate way of reflecting, as effectively as possible, the information that's available. 
Even when you think about the 10 -day timeframe for releasing PEFO, you have to count back from that to think 
about how much time would need to be taken, if there were to be any changes in economic parameters, for that to 
then flow through. Would it flow through on the payment side or the receipt side? It's quite complicated to flow 
that all through. But would there be scope to acknowledge in PEFO the significance of what's announced, 
depending on what is announced? Absolutely.  
Senator McGRATH:   Earlier, my colleague Senator Hume discussed the 11.2 per cent wage increase for 
public servants not being properly accounted for in the budget, given the total wage costs.  
Senator Gallagher:   That's your assertion.  
Senator McGRATH:   We were getting on so nicely, Senator Gallagher.  
Senator Gallagher:   Not from what I hear about your behaviour today, Senator McGrath.  
Senator McGRATH:   I give as good as I take.  
Senator Gallagher:   I hear you give a bit more than that.  
Senator McGRATH:   Well, perhaps people shouldn't make allegations about me. Secretary, Senator Hume 
wrote to you about this matter previously, and I'm seeking your assurance that the public sector wages will be 
accurately reflected in PEFO.  
Senator Gallagher:   They are in the budget.  
Ms Wilkinson :  We dealt with this last estimates, and I tried to articulate as clearly as I could in the letter back 
to Senator Hume exactly how we do projections for departmental expenses in the budget. We are not making any 
changes to the way in which we prepare our departmental expense projections in the budget; it's exactly the same 
as the way we always have. There's an indexation factor that we apply. That indexation factor is a function of both 
the wage price index and the CPI. It's the same index —well, actually, it's been updated, but it's an indexation 
factor which is designed to capture, to some degree, the wage and price pressures in the economy. Offsetting that, 
of course, there are terminating programs. There are always ons and offs in these exercises, and we will apply 
exactly the same methodology that we have always applied to project departmental expenses. Then it will be up to 
accountable authorities like myself to determine how we spend those, in terms of how we split that spending 
between supplier expenses and staffing.  
Senator McGRATH:   For PEFO, will the figures be updated? I don't want to verbal you. In terms of the 
public sector wages — 
Senator Gallagher:   That wouldn't change from the budget.  
Senator McGRATH:   will PEFO reflect any changes there?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 109 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Wilkinson :  If there were changes to the wage price index forecast or the CPI forecast or there were 
changes to other decisions which affected departmental expenses, it would change. But my working assumption is 
that there are unlikely to be updates to those projections, given the small gap between the budget and PEFO.  
Senator Gallagher:   I wouldn't be worried about the wage increase, Senator McGrath. You're going to sack 
40,000 workers. If you listened to your leader tonight, you're going to sack them from Canberra. I don't think 
wage increases are going to be the worry for those workers; it's actually not having a job under you.  
Senator McGRATH:   Thank you for that, Minister. Can I get on to spending on advertising. Is there a public 
advertising campaign for the budget?  
Ms Wilkinson :  I don't think so, no.  
Senator Gallagher:   No, there isn't.  
Senator McGRATH:   There are different components within the budget, though, that relate to other 
advertising campaigns.  
Senator Gallagher:   Not new ones. Nothing has changed there from when you were in government either. 
There's an independent campaign committee that assesses public information campaigns. There are some 
underway. When the election is called, some will continue and some will stop. We spend a lot less than you did 
on government advertising.  
Senator McGRATH:   Who's on the independent campaign committee?  
Senator Gallagher:   It's three people, three individuals, that have been responsible for decisions. Every 
campaign over a certain threshold goes through that committee.  
Ms Wilkinson :  The current members of the committee are the chair, Meredith Fairweather, and the members 
Adam Davey and Allyson Warrington.  
Senator McGRATH:   I want to confirm that there's no advertising campaign for the budget but there are, 
obviously, advertising campaigns that have been budgeted for in relation to certain departments.  
Senator Gallagher:   In relation to previous, ongoing campaigns. Certainly, nothing that's a new measure in 
here will get to a point where there's able to be a public information campaign attached to it. So it'll be ongoing 
campaigns, of which there are a few. Some will continue, and we will observe the appropriate processes about 
reaching agreement which ones continue. They are usually ones like public health messaging and, perhaps, 
Defence recruitment —things like that. The others will stop.  
Senator McGRATH:   The Future Made in Australia campaign?  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't think that is one that we would be continuing. We would write to the shadow —I 
wouldn't expect there to be agreement on that one.  
Ms Wilkinson :  The caretaker conventions are very clear around campaign advertising. As soon as an election 
is called, one of the roles that Finance has is to immediately cease all campaign advertising.  
Ms Harris :  With the exception of the AEC.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Yes, and then a decision is taken about which of the existing campaigns could be restarted 
because the judgement is that they are not political in nature.  
Senator McGRATH:   When would you write to the —is it you, Minister, who writes, or your secretary?  
Senator Gallagher:   I would write to Senator Hume and engage with her, as Senator Birmingham did with me. 
It's pretty standard. The main ones are public health.  
Senator McGRATH:   And I think Defence recruiting — 
Senator Gallagher:   Maybe. I mean, that would be one that usually continues, but, obviously, we need to 
reach agreement with you guys.  
Senator McGRATH:   So there'd be no other campaigns running.  
Senator Gallagher:   None other than the AEC and whatever we reach agreement with Senator Hume over.  
Senator McGRATH:   I've got a query in relation to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. There's an 
additional $2 billion in equity towards the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. What's that for, may I ask? Budget 
Paper No. 2, page 27, says:  
The Government will provide $2.0 billion to recapitalise the Clean Energy Finance Corporation … 
and then has a bit of word salad.  
Senator Gallagher:   It's to do its job. That's its mandate.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 110 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Patterson :  Yes. 
Senator Gallagher:   So it can keep entering into projects as it has been doing for many years now.  
Senator McGRATH:   What's the current capital position of the corporation?  
Senator Gallagher:   That's probably a question for another portfolio.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think you're the responsible minister, Minister.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm a shareholder, but I'm not the portfolio minister. I'm a shareholder , or another minister 
in all of the specialist investment vehicles, so I have a line of sight, particularly over the financial arrangements 
and some of the governance matters, but the Minister for Climate Change and Energy has the portfolio 
responsibility for the actual operation of the CEFC.  
Ms Wilkinson :  In Budget Paper No. 1, on pages 318 -321, there is detail on each of the specialist investment 
vehicles. T he Clean Energy Finance Corporation  is halfway down page 319 . It shows that , as of 30 June 2024 —
so these are usually brought to book at the end of every financial year —CEFC had $31.9 billion made available to 
it for investment, of which $10.9 billion had been committed to projects.  
Senator McGRATH:   In the 2 023-24 budget, the government previously supplied an additional $20.5 billion, 
of which $11½ billion  was provided  immediately and a further $9 billion was added by a new appropriation. I 
started this line of questioning with the $2 billion. Is that new funding or is that part of the $9 billion?  
Mr Windeyer :  Senator, I think that's new. T he numbers the secretary just mentioned, the $ 31 billion 
approximately of total funding, includes Rewiring the Nation funding, and the $2 billion recapitalisation was, in a 
sense, to recapitalise the ge neral portfolio of funds  to do its other activit ies. 
Senator McGRATH:   Can you walk me through this. There's $31.9 billion made available to it for 
investment, of which $10.9 billion has been committed to projects. Why does it need another $2 billion?  
Ms Wilkinson :  I'm not sure  that we are going to be able to help you much further.  There are advanced 
discussions with the states on th e Rewiring the Nation element of the funding that has been allocated  to the 
CEFC . I think it 's worth while keeping those a bit separate in your mind . And this $2 billion recapitalisation  is for, 
what I would call, the general purpose of the C EFC. Do you have anything to add there, Mr Sorbello.  
Mr Sorbello :  No. 
Senator McGRATH:   My maths is terrible. Is the $21 billion for R ewiring the Nation ? 
Senator Gallagher:   There's $20 billion for Rewiring the Nation, which you have  just announced you 're going 
to abolish, and that would mean ripping up as number of agreements with the states. I'm not actually entirely sure 
how you would do that, but that's what I heard in the budget reply tonight. But the $2 billion is to recapitalise the 
general operating revenue of the CEFC to do the things it has been doing aside from Rewiring the Nation.  
Senator McGRATH:   Is the $20 billion formally acquitted against agreements with the states, Minister?  
Senator Gallagher:   Again, that's probably best asked of climate change and energy. My understanding is that 
there are either agreements or advanced negotiations around those agreements. It's essentially creating the grid 
that we need for a dispersed energy system that's going to happen even if you do your mad nuclear plans. So I'm 
actually not sure how you're going to do that, but that's obviously a thing that floats your boat in your budget 
reply.  
Senator McGRATH:   Yes, it's very good. I thank you, Minister, for that. Secretary , at the last estimates, 
Senator Hume asked you a question . You said that you had not ruled out that you had discussed an economic and 
fiscal statement. I remember there was a bit of toing and froing about whether it was going to be a budget or a 
statement, and the difference thereof. We've had a cyclone and now we're at budget estimates. For the preparation 
of this budget, when did the Department of Finance first send draft measure descriptions up to the finance 
minister's office?  
Senator Gallagher:   I can answer that. It would have been in the last month, I would imagine.  
Senator McGRATH:   In the last four weeks?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, I would think so.  
Senator McGRATH:   Can you recall the date, Minister?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, honestly, look at the number of budget books. All of these get sent to me, in one 
way or another. I said at the time that we were planning for a budget. We've been planning for a budget since 
MYEFO. We've been working on a budget. We've handed down a budget. The normal processes of being Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 111 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  provided measured descriptions and other drafts of budget documents were followed in the usual way, as you 
would expect.  
Senator McGRATH:   In terms of the timeframe of the measures being sent up to your office, you're saying it's 
within the normal timeframe.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. 
Senator McGRATH:   It's normally within one — 
Senator Gallagher:   Actually, I  feel like we were a bit more organised this year.  
Ms Wilkinson :  I think it was a little early.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. Maybe I'm just getting used to it, but, certainly from my point of view, I felt it went 
very smoothly and was a little less hurried than previous times.  
Senator McGRATH:   When was the draft statement of risks first provided to the minister's office for 
clearance?  
Senator Gallagher:   It would have been in that month and, from memory, reasonably early in that month.  
Senator McGRATH:   You're saying it was about four weeks ago. Today's date is 27 March. Are you saying it 
was at the beginning of March?  
Ms Wilkinson :  I think the minister said that it was within the last month.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. 
Ms Wilkinson :  We'd have to take on notice exactly when we provided the draft up. We work on these 
documents over a period of time, and then we finalise them and send them up for the minister to approve. I'm 
happy to take on notice when we provided that.  
Senator Gallagher:   But it was very much in the normal way that these things happen —nothing unusual.  
Senator McGRATH:   Were there later inclusions?  
Senator Gallagher:   In what way?  
Senator McGRATH:   To the provision of that draft statement?  
Senator Gallagher:   Of risks?  
Senator McGRATH:   Yes. 
Ms Wilkinson :  No. 
Senator Gallagher:   I cleared a statement of risks that appeared in my in -tray. 
Ms Wilkinson :  There's a normal process for landing a budget, and the statement of risks was cleared and 
agreed in the normal timeframes.  
Senator Gallagher:   But if you're asking if I cleared one and then something was added and then I had to clear 
that—that is not what happened. It was the normal clearance process.  
Senator McGRATH:   You've answered the next question. Prior to the printing of the budget books, did 
Finance run the reconciliation and close the central budget management system?  
Ms Wilkinson :  We always do.  
Senator Gallagher:   That's what happens. We'd be worried if they didn't!  
Ms Wilkinson :  In every budget process there are a number of reconciliations that are undertaken. Every time 
that we are preparing to undertake a new reconciliation, you have to close off CBMS. Then you do the 
reconciliation, and then a decision is taken to open it for the next set of decisions to go in. That's just the way it 
works. In the normal budget process anywhere between three and five reconciliations take place. Maybe I 
shouldn't say this, but we always hope for three. I don't think I've ever been involved in a budget where there have 
been only three.  
Senator McGRATH:   How many were in this budget?  
Ms Wilkinson :  I think there were four. I think that's right.  
Mr Pfitzner :  I think there might have been four.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Yes. 
Senator McGRATH:   When was the first one? Can you tell me the dates?  
Ms Wilkinson :  No. Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 112 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   I'm not sure what sort of secret piece of information you're trying to gather here. 
Honestly, it was a normal process. Everything was cleared normally. The system worked properly. It was a little 
less stressful than the last time from my point of view. The system worked well.  
Senator McGRATH:   Well, you shouldn't be worried then about my line of question ing—  
Senator Gallagher:   No. But I just — 
Senator McGRATH:   because it's so innocent.  
Senator Gallagher:   Exactly . But are  you really enjoying spending time here at a quarter to nine  asking about 
the mechanics of the  CBMS?  
Senator McGRATH:   I think , with respect, Minister,  we'd all prefer to be somewhere else.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, f eel free to find that place, Senator McGrath.  
Senator McGRATH:   I suspect  that may happen tomorrow. But c an you tell me when the first reconciliation 
happened and the subsequent one —which dates ?  
Ms Wilkinson :  I'm happy to take that on notice. I don't think we usually reveal that information, in any budget 
that I've been involved in, but let me take it on notice.  
Senator Gallagher:   It would be within  the last month.  
Senator McGRATH:   So, once again, withi n the last four weeks ? 
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. 
Senator McGRATH:   I want to ask about the income tax cut s. 
Senator Gallagher:   Treasury . 
Senator McGRATH:   Considering what's going to happen tomorrow , what assistance you can provide would 
be gratefully received.  
Senator Gallagher:   Very little . We're not responsible for the tax cuts . Treasury will appear  tomorrow.  
Senator McGRATH:   The Department of F inance would still brief the finance minister regarding revenue 
measures  such as income tax cuts?  
Senator Gallagher:   They brief me on all matters relating to the budget.  
Senator McGRATH:   Secretary , when did the department first brief the minister on options for tax changes 
since the last budget?  
Senator Gallagher:   That's about government deliberations , and we don't go into that.  
Senator McGRATH:   The government announced the vast majority of major spending  decisions contained in 
the budget before  Cyclone Alfred hit . Is that correct?  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't know what you're  referring to.  
Senator McGRATH:   Well, Medicare  and things like that .  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, specifically? Yes, Medicare —  
Senator McGRATH:   But the one significant measure that was not announced was the income tax cuts . Did 
the department have any involvement in discussions of the income tax cut s, or brief the minister regarding the tax 
cuts announced in the budget , before 7 March?  
Senator Gallagher:   I have a number of discussions both with colleagues and the d epartment, and I'm fully 
across all matters relating to the budget at all times . That's the way we work . Between Dr Chalmers and myself, 
there are very few secrets when it comes to the budget . We worked together on almost every part of it. And I feel 
very well supported by the Department of Finance.  
Senator McGRATH:   My question is to the department . Was  the department involved in discussions of 
income tax cuts before 7 March?  
Senator Gallagher:   The department doesn't confirm what  discussions it has been involved in as part of the 
budget deliberations . That's  a longstanding practice.  
Ms Wilkinson :  We're involved in all matters that end up in the budget. That's just in the normal course of 
these things being considered.  
Senator McGRATH:   When was the Department of Finance first made aware of the income tax cut s in their 
current form?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 113 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   No, we don't —it's part of the budget deliberations. That would have been your answer 
when Mat hias and Simon were here , and it's my answer now.  
Senator McGRATH:   Were they considered by ERC , or were they done by a letter  process ? 
Senator Gallagher:   It went through our normal processes . The Prime Minister runs a very traditional 
government , where m inisters are consulted , unlike the government you were a member of  where the Prime 
Minister was the Treasurer, the  finance minister and the Prime Minister all at the one time without the Treasurer 
of the finance  minister knowing . Our Prime Minister  operates differently . He runs a traditional cabinet, and we 
have our standard processes , which include committees of cabinet considering all matters relating to the budget.  
Senator McGRATH:   So the income tax cuts would have gone through  the ERC process — 
Senator Gallagher:   Well, I've answered that. I'm answering . I'm not telling you what the ERC considered, but 
I've answered it  in a different way.  
Senator McGRATH:   Alright. Can I confirm that there are no changes to the one  per cent efficiency dividend 
that was discussed at the last estimates?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Correct.  
Senator McGRATH:   So no changes whatsoever ? So it's still — 
Ms Patterson :  It's still one per cent , and  the existing exemptions , both partial and full,  remain the same.  
Senator McGRATH:   I want to turn now to the measure 'Savings from external labour —further extension ', 
which is on page 32 of Budget Paper No. 2 . Work with me here. I t looks like the additional year of 20 28-29 in the 
forward estimates —you have in the 202 4-25 budget reduced departmental funding for agencies and departments 
worth $718 million  in the year. Is t hat correct ? 
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. 
Senator McGRATH:   So can you  confirm  that, as you told this committee in February , this $7 18 million is 
only applied to those agencies where the efficiency dividend applies?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes.  
Ms Patterson :  There are slight differences. As I indicated  at the last estimates, there are some additional 
entities that have been exempt from this particular save but for whom the efficiency dividend does apply.  
Senator McGRATH:   Can you tell me which ones, please . 
Ms Patterson :  It includes ASIO and ASIS —though  that is consistent with national security ; we basically have 
the same rules for them under this as we would normally do with an exemption under the efficiency dividend for 
national security agencies ; the national collecting institutions, the nine of those; t he High Court of Australia ; the 
ANAO; the Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commission ; the National Anti -Corruption Commission ; the 
Administrative Review Tribunal ; IP Australia ; and the parliamentary departments.  
Senator McGRATH:   So if those agencies are exempt from the efficiency  dividend it means that they are also 
exempt from the departmental funding —that's correct?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Sorry, I think — 
Senator McGRATH:   We're at cross -purposes?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Yes. There are a whole set of agencies that are exempt from the efficiency dividend. In 
addition , the agencies that Ms Patterson just read out are exempt  from the external labour savings .  
Senator McGRATH:   Okay , I get you now. I just want to get this on the record. The efficiency dividend is a 
reduction of one per cent of departmental funding from the appropriation , to drive efficiencies.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Correct.  
Senator McGRATH:   And the 'Saving s from external labour ' measure  is a reduction of a set amount of 
departmental funding which could have hypothetically been spent on external labour , so it is being  removed — 
Ms Patterson :  Yes. 
Senator McGRATH:   even though that is because the department al funding had also been  spent on other 
matters ? 
Ms Patterson :  Essentially h ow it works is that that funding is a proportion  of department s' supplier 
expenses —a narrower component of the ir departmental expenses —and t he way that that saving is allocated is we 
take that funding from agencies before we give them  their d epartmental funding  but, o bviously , with a clear Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 114 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  indication of the government's intent that those efficiencies or savings need to be delivered by reducing 
expenditure.  
Senator Gallagher:   That's where w e believe there 's room for those agencies to make savings . 
Ms Wilkinson :  The distribution of the external -labour save is slightly different from the efficiency dividend 
because e ntities who have a higher proportion of spending on supplier expenses make a proportionally greater 
contribution under this  save.  
Senator McGRATH:   So they can take a portion of it away and then  call it a saving ? 
Ms Wilkinson :  No— 
Senator Gallagher:   Well, t hey don't get it , so it's saved.  
Ms Patterson :  It is a saving because , if we were going to give  $10 to a department , we would take a dollar 
and we 'd give  them nine , so we have saved the dollar.  
Senator McGRATH:   I might have to come back to that.  I want to ask about some adjustments to figures , on 
the staffing of agencie s, that are in  Budget Paper No. 4 . There are some adjustments in the historic figures. Can 
you take me through that — 
Ms Wilkinson :  The figure for the 20 24-25 year ; is that what you are talking about?  
Senator McGRATH:   Yes.  
Ms Wilkinson :  The first estimates for 2024-25 are determined in the 2024-25 budget. That 's an estimate  from  
entities as to what their average staffing level will be . In the subsequent budget, they report on an updated 
estimate , because they haven't actually finished the 2024-25 year of what their ASL was in that year.  
Ms Patterson :  Then they will report again, in  their annual report , at the end of 2024-25 as to  what their final 
ASL was for 20 24-25. At this point in time , that is still an estimate for 2024-25 because we have n't made it to the 
end of that financial year.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think 2021 -22 also.  What happened there?  
Senator Gallagher:   That's probably what your office rs are measuring the baseline from , is it ?  
Ms Wilkinson :  There haven't been any changes back to 20 21-22. I 've seen a little bit of  commentary around  
it. The question is whether the 20 21-22 figures were the ones that were the first estimates or the revised estimates  
at the end of the year.  
Senator McGRATH:   Why would the tables be different? Can you just take me — 
Senator Gallagher:   Because there's estimates and then there's actual, really.  
Ms Wilkinson :  'Why has the 2024 -25 ASL var ied?' Is that your question?  
Senator McGRATH:   Yes. 
Ms Wilkinson :  That could be for a couple of different reasons . It could reflect on the success of recruitment , 
over the course of a year, by an entity. I t could reflect  new decisions that have been taken  that might have been 
reflected in MYEFO or could even have been reflected in this budget  and how those have varied over time. It 
reflects the decisions that are taken by accountable authorities around how the funding that's appropriated to the 
department is most effectively spent. There are some entities who , over the course of the year, may have decided 
to recruit ASL rather than have , for example, contractors perform some functions. That would , then, lead to an 
increase in ASL.  
Ms Patterson :  Yes, t here are certain ly those three reasons . It could be some conversions , as the secretary said . 
Some of it  could be decisions that were made in MYEFO towards the end of the year, because sometimes a 
decision would be made to give resourc ing to a department for the remaining six months of the year . The third 
category , then, is largely around internal decisions made by accountable authorities.  
Senator McGRATH:   Bearing that in mind,  I want to go back to 2021-22. The 2025-26 budget papers have 
got 2021-22 at 171,938 , but in the 2024 -25 budget the figure for that year was 173,142. There's a reasonable 
difference there . I'm trying to understand why there's  an historical revision , because that's  some time ago.  
Mr Pfitzner :  Those two figures that you reported are the 2021-22 ASL figures that were reported in the 2022- 
23 March budget  and then the 2022-23 October budge . The u sual practice that we follow in a historical estimates 
table , looking at the 2025 -26 budget papers , is to record the revised estimate , as the secretary indicated . The final 
estimate that was done for the 2021 -22 year was $171,938. That was included in the 2022 -23 October budget . I 
don't have the 2024 -25 budget  papers in front of me, so  I'm not sure what number s appeared there , but that 's the 
methodology that 's gone into the 20 25-26 historical papers.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 115 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator McGRATH:   Can you get them for me ; is that possible?  
Mr Pfitzner :  I don't know if anyone has that here.  
Senator Gallagher:   We'll need to take that on notice.  
Mr Pfitzner :  We can check that on notice . 
Senator McGRATH:   It seems quite a big revision ; that's all.  
Senator Gallagher:   What page are you on, Senator, in Budget Paper No. 4? 
Senator McGRATH:   Page 165.  
Ms Wilkinson :  The thing I would say, Senator, is that the difference  is between the  2021-22 estimate , which 
was estimated when the budget was landed in March, and what the final estimate was when the October budget 
was landed. I guess, a t the point of the March budget, we still had four months to go in that year , and the thing 
about average staffing levels is that it's the average estimate of full -time-equivalent employees over a whole year. 
There were, if you like, four more months of staffing in that year that were not clea r that, by the time we got to 
the October budget , we ha d estimates of actuals for.  
Senator McGRATH:   I can understand the logic there , but the figures changed  in the same table between last 
year and this year . That's what I'm trying to understand . Why has it changed in the last year? Surely, the 
reconciliation shouldn't — 
Ms Wilkinson :  Can we take that on notice?  It may  be the case that , in last year's budget papers, what was 
included was not the final estimate for 2021-22 but the March budget estimate for 2021-22. I'm happy to take that 
on notice . Sorry, I haven 't been across that detail and aware of that change. But the consistent approach we 've 
taken in every year has been to use the final best estimate from  the budget process es. 
Senator McGRATH:   I still don't understand why it change d between last year and this year . 
Senator Gallagher:   I think it 's been addressing an inconsistency ; that's my understanding.  
Senator McGRATH:   But that means  that— 
Senator Gallagher:   Between actual s and forecast s. 
Senator McGRATH:   Surely, it shouldn't take three or so years to catch up on this inconsistency that you're  
talking about.  
Senator Gallagher:   It may  be that someone 's just realised . I don't know. Seriously , it's not — 
Ms Patterson :  We'll take it on notice.  
Mr Pfitzner :  We'll take on notice why that happened.  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't know what you 're worried about. You're about to sack 41,000 , if you win the 
election, so this is really a bit of a moot point.  
Ms Wilkinson :  I've very happy to take on notice the process of how we uncovered —it will have been in the 
QA process that it was realised that we had referred to the March budget , whereas  we should have been ca pturing  
the October budget.  I'm happy to take on notice how we came across that and , subsequently,  the decision -making 
around updating that figure in the budget.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think, if I 'm reading these tables correctl y—they're very small —the figures for 2023-
24 have also changed.  
Senator COLBECK:   For 2021 -22, 2022 -23, 2023 -24 and 2024 -25; they've all changed.  
Senator McGRATH:   I can't understand why . I know you've said you'll take it on notice, but this seems 
pretty — 
Senator Gallagher:   Officials are able to  take things on notice, Senator McGrath.  
Senator McGRATH:   I realise that, Minister, but this is a not inconsistent — 
Senator Gallagher:   Well, it's not as big as sacking 40,000 public servants from Canberra.  
Senator McGRATH:   Thank you, Minister.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, you won't have a finance department or a Treasury if that's actually what you plan 
on doing. So I really don't know why you're hung up on page 165 of BP 4 when, if you win the election, there will 
be 41,000 fewer public servants from Canberra.  
Senator McGRATH:   With respect, Minister, it looks like we can't actually keep track of how many public 
servants we have, because the figures seem to change — Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 116 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   I don't think that matters. You've said you'll sack 40,000, and the Leader of the 
Opposition confirmed that tonight.  
Senator McGRATH:   For example, in last year's budget papers, the number for 2023 -24 was 191,861, but this 
year's budget papers say the figure was 197,108. That's 6,000 public servants that have appeared on the books for 
the same financial year. I just don't know where they've come from. I can understand reconciliations and that 
there might be small changes —but 6,000 public servants?  
Senator Gallagher:   That's a pretty small number compared to the number you want to sack.  
Senator McGRATH:   Thank you, Minister.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm not going to let it go, because you'll destroy the Public Service if you do that. I don't 
think I can let that go, after what I've heard tonight. So I'm going to keep saying it all night.  
Senator McGRATH:   What is the record -keeping process to make sure that the figures are accurate? The 
difference — 
Senator Gallagher:   There's an estimate, and then there's an actual. So we rely on departments to give us the 
actual at the end of the year —we also rely on departments for the forecast —but there are ons and offs during the 
year where departments make decisions about that and then they report against it.  
Senator McGRATH:   So you're saying that, under that, departments have just added 6,000 public servants?  
Senator Gallagher:   I understand, and I'm advised, that the 197,000 figure was on page 169 of BP 4 in last 
year's budget —so it was transparent in the budget —but there had been an error in table 2.3, which has been 
corrected. I think in the footnote there is an explanation of that, which we've tried to give. There are some 
corrections that have happened in making sure that we are essentially measuring like with like —so between 
forecasts and actuals.  
Senator McGRATH:   Secretary, does it concern you that the tables are effectively thousands out?  
Ms Wilkinson :  What concerns me is making sure that the data is as accurate as possible. As I've said, I have 
taken it on notice. I will seek a full briefing from the team as to which, if any, numbers have changed and why 
they have changed and what the source of any error was. I can't do anything more than that at this — 
Senator McGRATH:   Do you have confidence in this table that the figures are correct?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. 
Ms Wilkinson :  I do. 
Senator McGRATH:   But the figures —sorry, I didn't actually specify which table it was before you said yes.  
Senator Gallagher:   I presume it's table 2.3. Is it, or is it another table?  
Senator McGRATH:   Yes, but — 
Senator Gallagher:   Right.  
Senator McGRATH:   But you've said before, Minister, that there was an error on table 2.3.  
Senator Gallagher:   As I am advised, there was but the number was correct in another part of the budget 
paper. The responsibility is to ensure that the information, where it may have been incorrect —the secretary has 
taken that on notice to clarify that and make sure it is updated appropriately, which it is. But, really, what a moot 
point tonight when you say you're going to sack 41,000.  
Senator McGRATH:   But, Minister — 
Senator Gallagher:   I don't understand what your problem is here.  
Senator COLBECK:   You don't even know how many you've got.  
Senator Gallagher:   We report how many we've got — 
Senator McGRATH:   Minister, there were 6,000 public servants — 
Senator Gallagher:   Senator McGrath is going back to 2020 -21—come on. The information is correct, and 
you're banking your savings on it, mate. So, if they're not correct, you've got a big black hole in your savings. 
From what I hear tonight, you're hoping to get $7 billion a year out of the Public Service.  
Senator McGRATH:   So four years — 
Senator Gallagher:   I think that would make table 2.3 very different next time round.  
Senator McGRATH:   Minister, with respect, we are trying to work out how many public servants there are , 
and what we have found is that, across the tables, four years  are actually different , and I think that is of concern.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 117 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   Right. What is your concern? Please tell me : what is your concern about  this? 
Senator McGRATH:   With respect, Minister, you just said there 's a mistake on table 2.3 — 
Senator Gallagher:   No, I said there had been, not that there was on this table 2.3.  
Senator McGRATH:   It seems quite a flippant attitude —not from the officials at the table but from you, 
Minister. Y ou don't seem concerned there were mistakes here  in relation to — 
Senator Gallagher:   Do you know what I'm concerned about ? Forty -one thousand  public servants in Canberra 
being sacked . That is what I am concerned about , and I'm surprised at your lack of concern about it but your 
overwhelming concern about table 2.3, to be honest.  
Senator McGRATH:   Well, I would like to  make sure — 
Senator Gallagher:   Come on . 
Senator McGRATH:   with respect, Minister , that the information is — 
Senator Gallagher:   Come on, Senator McGrath. Y our leader has gone out and said he will sack 40,000 
Canberra  based public servants — 
Senator McGRATH:   So you 're not concerned — 
Senator Gallagher:   And yo u're like, 'Oh , dear, what is happening on table 2.3 ?' I mean, seriously . Come on.  
Senator McGRATH:   Minister, the evidence — 
Senator COLBECK:   Thirty -six thousand public  servants, according to the table.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, and it's  been updated with the actual s. I don't know if you 're arguing it's too little or 
too much , and then you 're going to sack 40,000 anyway. I don't understand the level of concern . 
Senator McGRATH:   Minister, last year's budget does have your name on it  and it has just been shown to 
have inaccurate information . You 're the Minister for  the Public Service.  
Senator Gallagher:   I am.  
Senator McGRATH:   But the tables that have been presented — 
Senator Gallagher:   And I will defend them and argue against your reckless sacking  of 40,000 — 
Senator McGRATH:   But you can't tell us  precisely  how many public servants there are, because the figures 
across four years between the two tables are different , and you don't seem concerned about this.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm concerned about the sacking of 40,000 public servants.  
Senator McGRATH:   So you're not concerned about — 
Senator Gallagher:   I'm very concerned about that , and I'm very concerned that you're not concerned  about 
that, Senator McGrath , and that you are  now trying to be concerned about something else when many of the jobs 
in here that you are concerned about, apparently, will be terminated if you win the election. So forgive me if I 
don't take it seriously about your level of angst and concern  about table 2.3.  
Senator McGRATH:   I would just hope that the information that is being presented to the Australian people is 
correct information.  
Senator Gallagher:   Oh, yes . I'm sure that keeps you awake at night when you 're think ing about how you 're 
ruining the lives of 40,000 families across the nation. I'm sure table 2.3 is the thing that keeps you up.  
Senator McGRATH:   I take it, Secretary, you are concerned enough to make sure that you will take it on 
notice to come back  in terms of — 
Ms Wilkinson :  Absolutely. I will confirm this,  but my understanding is that the differences are whether the 
column in table 2.3 contained the original estimates of ASL in a given year or the final estimates of ASL in a 
given year.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, w hich is what you said.  
Ms Wilkinson :  So the numbers that were in the table before were correct  in the sense  they did reflect the 
estimates in that year of how many ASL there would be. My understanding is that  in this budget  consideration  
was given to the fact that a better way of showing what the outcomes are across time is to include, at all times, 
what the revised estimate of ASL is in that year. That 's my understanding . That's  the information I 've been able to 
get while I'm here  at the table. As I said, I'm very happy to take it on notice. This is not about there being , if you 
like, errors in the database . There are , unavoidably , two numbers for every year that could have been reflected in 
this table . One is the original estimate of ASL in the year and the other  is the final  estimate of ASL in the year.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 118 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  We have, for consistency, decided  that a better way of showing the se data is to have the revised estimates all the 
way down. As I said, that's  my understanding.  
Senator Gallagher:   That's my understanding too.  
Ms Wilkinson :  I am happy to take it on notice and provide any detail if anything else is revealed to me.  
Senator McGRATH:   In particular, the years —sorry Senator Pratt.  
CHAIR:   Senator McGrath, I'm going to rotate the call very shortly. I'll let you finish putting your question, 
however.  
Senator McGRATH:   I've got a little bit more to go, so, if you want to rotate the call now, that's fine.  
CHAIR:   No problem. Senator Sheldon.  
Senator SHELDON:   In this very important conversation about the impact on Australian services, it's not only 
an important question of 41,000 families being affected; it's the means of families that are affected around the 
country because those services are undermined.  
I know in earlier evidence there was a discussion about the National Emergency Management Authority. Just 
before I ask the direct question, I want to publicly congratulate all the people from the  National Emergency 
Management Authority  on their hard work, dedication and thoughtfulness during the recent event in Queensland 
and northern New South Wales. Too often you see people criticise public servants for not being agile, which is 
unfair, but you can't get a better example of how agile the Public Service is than leading up to and dealing with 
that event —dealing with multiple agencies within the national Public Service, including Centrelink, many of them 
based in New South Wales and Queensland, with large numbers also in the ACT ; coordinating with Centrelink ; 
coordinating with state authorities in different states ; coordinating with local government public servants . These 
are all those public servants that happen ed to provide services that helped millions of people in this country to be 
assured that their governments at every level were going to protect and support them. That was coordinated by 
NEMA.  
We have just had it announced today that we're going to have that organisation gutted —not only in our regions 
and in this state, but for every service that needs coordination and response with the ever -growing climate 
challenge that we have in this country. And to have these people stand here and say, and sit here and announce, 
this sort of trite commentary is an embarrassment to this country because it will mean devastation for so many 
people in desperate need when we're going to see more and more of these events. Minister, we're not deniers, and 
I don't even think my colleagues on the right -hand side of me are deniers of climate change. They know what the 
consequences are, and those consequences are going to doom people to a lack of coordination  and a lack of 
response by government when people are in the most desperate need. Have I got it wrong or is this 41,000 going 
to have an impact for everybody in this country, many millions of people, despite the great work that's been done 
and only so recently demonstrated?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, absolutely. I know they'd been talking about it for months, but to hear from the 
Leader of the Opposition tonight that they think those jobs are excess to requirements and that they'll be abolished 
and savings found —I know exactly what it'll mean. It'll mean longer waits, poorer service and job losses in 
regions and towns all over the country. It'll mean veterans go back to waiting two years to get their claims 
allocated, if they're lucky, if they don't pass away in the meantime. Yes, it'll have devastating impacts. And I 
know what they'll do if they actually do get the chance to govern. They'll employ a shadow workforce, like they 
did last time. It's just off the books; they're just not honest about it. And I note Senator McGrath can't even bring 
himself to defend the decision tonight.  
Senator McGRATH:   It's estimates, Minister. I'm here to ask questions, not answer your questions.  
Senator Gallagher:   But you're not running to the defence of your leader, are you? It's because you're sitting in 
front of a room full of hardworking public servants who you basically have just told that you're going to sack the 
lot of them.  
Senator McGRATH:   No, I've got questions that I'm putting to you and that's my role here. I think my 
colleague Senator Sheldon has some questions that he's putting to you.  
Senator SHELDON:   Well, it's good to see that they're not supporting it. Unfortunately, not supporting — 
Senator Gallagher:   It's harder to look people in the eye and say it. I accept that.  
Senator SHELDON:   Particularly when you're looking people in the eye that are actually doing the work that 
makes a difference to this country for millions of Australians.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 119 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   Yes. The Leader of the Opposition always seeks to demonise Canberra based public 
servants, when the reality is that —I heard him say again tonight, 'We'll protect frontline services' —the vast 
majority of the 40,000 are frontline services. Defence, national security, Home Affairs, Services Australia, the 
ATO, the National Disability Insurance Agency —they're all front facing, either keeping us safe or providing 
services. There is absolutely no way you can sack 40,000 public servants without affecting frontline service 
delivery. I f you sack the whole financ e and t reasury department s, you're pretty much only getting up to 5 ,000, I 
think.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Less.  
Senator Gallagher:   Less! You poor things.  
Ms Wilkinson :  No, no, not that many.  
Senator Gallagher:   Between you and Treasury?  
Ms Wilkinson :  Yes—no, no.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, add PM&C in there, then you'll probably get to 5,000. These people are talking 
about 40,000.  
Senator SHELDON:   I guess they want to bring PwC back. That's been a great example in my mind. I'll ask 
them to make a further comment.  
Senator Gallagher:   The idea that you would find $7 billion in saving s and not having to employ a shadow 
workforce i s not credible.  
Senator SHELDON:   And, of course , employing a shadow workforce, as we know, doesn't mean it's cheaper . 
It certainly  doesn't mean it's more efficient . We saw what happened with the Department of Veterans' Affairs. 
Also, the capacity to coordinate across different agencies becomes limited.  
Senator Gallagher:   It's clearly very evident that those high -volume agencies were using a lot of labour hire —
Services Australia, the NDIA, Veterans' Affairs —and the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission was a big 
user of labour hire. They were more expensive arrangements because you'd have a for -profit provider clipping the 
ticket on the way through, so of course it would cost more. You get a poorer service, too, because people aren't 
training and getting all the skills they need to provide a seamless service. That was the other loss --the loss of the 
skill and the professionalism of those positions.  
Senator SHELDON:   This is not a reflection on those people that are labour hired. The fact is that, if you're 
not trained, if you're not skilled, if you're not given a career path and if you're not given the opportunity to 
develop further, in this case, you're holding tens of thousands of Australians back while sacking tens of thousands 
of other Australians. You've actually got a virtuous horror show. It's the opposite of a virtuous circle. You've got a 
horror show. You've got a circle of destitution with regard to services being better provided to the Australian 
public, let alone appropriate opportunities provided for Australians to try to deliver for their communities.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, absolutely. A nd we have offered many of those labour hire workers the opportunity 
for a good , secure , well-paid job, of which a round a  third of the additional staff fall into that category.  
Senator SHELDON:   Minister, I'm very aware that, particularly when it came to wages and conditions for 
public servants, whil st the companies that were offering labour hire work, in many circumstances , they were 
charging with clipping the ticket , as you said before . Rather than the work force getting those wages, skilling, 
training and opportunities, and hardworking Australians wanting to make a difference for their families , the ticket 
was being clipped for somebody right at the top and often companies overseas. So they want to export money 
overseas , export profit overseas  and have Australian workers on lower wages  with no job opportunit ies, no  
training , and services in this country be ing demolished.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. T hat's what is at stake.  
Senator SHELDON:   We saw that with same job, same pay,  when they opposed those sorts of arrangements 
as they have every other arrangement that's made a fairer playing field.  
Senator Gallagher:   That's right, Senator Sheldon, and that's what we're going to have to fight to protect.  
CHAIR:   Senator McGrath.  
Senator McGRATH:   Minister, on 10 February, the Mandarin reported:  
Minister for Finance, Government Services, Women and the Public Service Katy Gallagher says she does not believe the 
Australian Public Service needs to grow above the present average staffing level of 209,000 people.   
It will obviously increase again. Is there any level you would be uncomfortable with the Public Service growing 
to? Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 120 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   I have been clear, as I was at that conference, that I believe the Public Service is 
resourced appropriately.  
Senator McGRATH:   Since the 2024 -25 budget, there are now an additional 5½ thousand public servants, 
give or take. Is that correct?  
Senator Gallagher:   The largest increase has been the conversion of labour hire to permanent Public Service 
roles . So t hey were there , but you would like them off the books. The National Disability Insurance Agency has 
converted those roles into permanent Public Service roles. I think my comments remain. I think it's appropriately 
resourced now. I don't see the need for significant increases. I said that at that Mandarin  conference. It's a shame 
you weren't there, Senator McGrath, to explain to all the people in the room why you're going to sack 40,000 
people. As I said in the room, there will be ons and offs across agencies over time as programs terminate and new 
ones begin. I think, roughly, we have the balance right.  
Senator McGRATH:   You said the balance was right for a figure of 209,000, but it's gone — 
Senator Gallagher:   Did I, Senator McGrath? Is that in quotation marks, is it?  
Senator McGRATH:   That's the figure that— 
Senator Gallagher:   I think the question I was asked —from memory, considering I was there at that 
conference, and you weren't —was: do I believe it needs additional resourcing? My answer was that I think it's 
resourced appropriately. Obviously I was making those comments with knowledge of what was in the budget 
papers and that there had been a small additional increase based on labour -hire conversions.  
Senator McGRATH:   You were asked, Minister, whether the APS needed to grow beyond the 209,000 figure. 
You said, 'I don't believe so, and I've looked at this pretty carefully.'  
Senator Gallagher:   With some ons and offs, some conversions and all of those arrangements, I think it is 
appropriately resourced. I haven't changed my view on that.  
Senator McGRATH:   We've now got — 
Senator Gallagher:   Are you worried about that, Senator McGrath? I find it confusing that you have these 
significant worries but you're not at all worried about decimating the Public Service. This is what's confusing me 
tonight.  
Senator McGRATH:   Would you agree that the figure of 230,000 is too high?  
Senator Gallagher:   I think it's appropriately resourced now. I don't see the need for significant adjustments to 
ASL across departments. Obviously, there will be movements. When the submarine agency really gets going, 
there will be some additional staffing there I imagine, just as when programs finish or new technology is adopted 
there might be some downward revisions in other agencies. Do I think the Public Service should be 41,000 
workers shorter? No, I don't. I think that would be a disaster.  
Senator McGRATH:   That wasn't the question I asked. The question — 
Senator Gallagher:   I'm answering your question as best as I can.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think you're answering a different question.  
Senator Gallagher:   No, I'm not.  
Senator McGRATH:   You've said that you're comfortable with the 209,000 figure, but we're now up to 
213,000. It's grown.  
Senator Gallagher:   I've explained that to you, and I'm sorry if you're having trouble understanding that 
explanation.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm just trying to clarify.  
Senator Gallagher:   We've taken some people who were being paid off the books. They were actually 
working for the NDIA, but they weren't counted in the staffing numbers. They have now been converted to 
permanent roles because that is what's required. They've been added to the staffing number. It's not additional 
staff. Those jobs have been there, and they are now being done in a permanent capacity.  
Senator McGRATH:   The difference between the 2024 -25 budget figure and the actual 2024 -25 financial year 
that was printed in this year's budget is around $1.168 billion. This is in relation to employee expenses of the 
APS. That would be for the extra 5½ thousand public servants?  
Senator Gallagher:   Can you link me to where you're reading from —what table?  
Senator McGRATH:   It's note 7 in Budget Paper No. 1.  
Senator Gallagher:   Do you have a page number?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 121 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator McGRATH:   It's 294.  
Senator Gallagher:   Ms Patterson has got it. She knows where all the numbers are buried!  
Ms Patterson :  Senator, you're doing a comparison of 2024 -25 and 2025 -26 for wages and salary expenses?  
Senator McGRATH:   Yes. I'm trying to work out that figure. The $1.168 billion, which is the difference —
that would be the cost for the additional 5 ½ thousand public servants?  It's the difference  between the wages in 
2025-26, the 2024-25 forecast and then the 2025-26 forecast ? 
Ms Patterson :  Certainly , these figures for wage and salary expenses are estimates . They are provided to us by 
the agencies as to what they expect to spend on their employees in terms of wages and salaries. On that basis, 
certainly , the advice that we've collected from entities is that their expenditure in 2025-26, at this point, based on 
the ASL and other allocation s that have been given to them and the profile of those staff , will be that figure : 
30,450.  
Senator McGRATH:   Just so I understand : for the next year, 2026-27, if I read this correctly, the additional 
cost is only $352 million  and, the following year, the additional cost is only $300 million when you compare the 
2024-25 budget and the 2025-26 budget?  
Ms Patterson :  Are you comparing it against the 2024-25 budget pages or are you looking at the estimates in 
note 7  forward  to the 20 25-26? Obviously , those estimates will change from year -to-year depending on the 
decisions of government and therefore the advice from entities as to what they expect to spend on wages and 
salaries.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm told there's also some movement in there from supplier expenses, which would be the 
labour hire into APS wages. They would have been accounted for in another part of the budget.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm trying to compare 2025-26 across the two budget papers.  For the 2025-26 year, it's 
going to cost $1½ billion more —the figure I was referring to before.  
Ms Patterson :  Yes. 
Senator McGRATH:   Okay.  Why are the wages of the new public servants only included in the 2025-26 
year?  
Senator Gallagher:   They're not. 
Ms Patterson :  I think we have talked about this.  
Ms Wilkinson :  As Ms Patterson said, t he wages and salaries line is the aggregation across all entities of what 
they expect to spend on wages and salaries over the forward estimates. That reflects their internal decisions about 
how their departmental allocation —their departmental appropriation s will be split between wages and salaries and 
supplier  expenses . That reflects the combination of, on the one hand, indexation  of their departmental 
appropriations, which are indexed. Your departmental appropriation is indexed by a weighted average of the wage 
price index and the consumer price index but with a productivity offset. It 's then adjusted for the efficiency 
dividend . It's adjusted for the  external  labour save , and then there is an account that an accountable authority has 
in each of those forward estimates years to allocate. Of course , the other thing  is that we all have terminating 
programs —programs which were surge programs , which are finite programs. It reflects the net of all of these 
things together.  
Senator Gallagher:   In short, lots of ons and offs.  
Ms Wilkinson :  It doesn't assume decisions of future governments.  This is the baseline  at this time.  
Senator Gallagher:   It reflects all government decisions to date.  
Senator McGRATH:   So the wages bill after 2025-26 declines?  
Senator Gallagher:   That reflects decisions made  to date. For example , in this year's budget there are 600 
fewer Services Australia staff because they were brought on to do a specific piece of work about cleaning up a 
backlog. They have done that work , so they are not funded in an ongoing sense.  There are situations like that 
happening across the Public Service, and that will be reflected in this table going forward. I don't know if you 're 
criticising us for having too many staff or not enough at this point.  
Senator McGRATH:   I'm just asking questions, Minister . 
Senator Gallagher:   Yeah!  Have you been given the job to keep this going till 11.00? Is that the job that's 
been given to Senator McGrath tonight? That 's what it looks like.  
Senator McGRATH:   No, I'm naturally interested.  
Senator Gallagher:   No, I know that. Hmm!  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 122 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator McGRATH:   We've spoken before —well, Senator Hume spoke at the last estimates about the 11.2 
per cent wage increase for public servants. The budget did not reflect an increase of 11.3 per cent over the next 
three years  for public sector wages.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes it does.  
Senator McGRATH:   You're saying it does?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, it does , and  I have said that the whole time . It's not my fault if Senator Hume can't 
read budget papers.  
Senator McGRATH:   How is the government going to pay for this increase?  
Senator Gallagher:   Agencies are not supplemented for the wage increase. They are provided indexation that 
Ms Wilkinson has taken you through to adjust for costs. Indexation doesn't meet all the costs of wages , but it 
meets some of it , and they are required to live within their appropriation. We haven't changed the way they are 
being accounted for  from when you were in government. It is exactly the same way.  
Senator McGRATH:   So you're paying for it through the indexation, the efficiency dividend and the external 
labour save . Is that correct?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, there are saves, and indexation  is essentially an expense . It's paid to departments. 
Departments get additional money , and they have some reductions in expenditure , and t hen they have to live 
within their means  and they have to deliver on the EBA outcome s. 
Senator McGRATH:   Secretary, you said to Senator Hume before  that the budget forecast for wages and 
salaries expenses re flect current  government decisions and do not pre -empt future government decision , but the 
increase in wages by 11.2 per cent is a government decision.  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes; that's why it's reflected in the budget papers.  
Senator McGRATH:   So it is there.  
Senator Gallagher:   Agencies are required to meet their employee expenses through the appropriations that 
they are provided.  
Senator McGRATH:   How are they going to do that?  
Senator Gallagher:   Why are you worried about it? You 're going to sack 40,000 of them? Seriously —are you 
worried about whether or not they're going to get a pay rise? You 're actually taking  their job away.  
Senator McGRATH:   That's not the question . 
Senator Gallagher:   Well, seriously. I'm sorry, but I 've told you the pay rise is accounted for. All the 
government decisions made  to date are accounted for , and you are essentially wasting everyone's time here hand -
wringing over whether this is appropriate when your leader has just said he's going to sack 40,000 public servants . 
I mean, come on! Forgive me for not taking you seriously other than you have been given the very honourable 
job—the responsible job —of wasting time until 11  o'clock  tonight.  
Senator COLBECK:   Chair , if the minister would stop reflecting — 
Senator Gallagher:   No, I'm not going to , Senator Colbeck . This is the last evening and, frankly, after what 
I've heard your party is going to do to the Public Service  here if they win government, I am going to make 
comments about it. I'm not going to follow you . The first peep out of you tonight is feigning concern about this.  
Senator COLBECK:   Personal reflections about colleagues — 
Senator Gallagher:   Imagine being given the  very prestigious role of senior time waster  in an estimates  
committee. What a very prestigious role that is ! 
Senator COLBECK:   What a piece of work . 
CHAIR:   Senator Colbeck, do you have a point of order?  
Senator Gallagher:   I think Senator McGrath c alled  Senator Wong a piece of work today , and you just called 
me a piece of work.  
Senator COLBECK:   She called Senator McGrath a racist.  
Senator Gallagher:   That is not what I understand happened.  
Senator McGRATH:   She did.  
CHAIR:   Settle, petals!  
Senator Gallagher:   She reflected on some  comments you made in your inaugural speech , I believe.  
Senator COLBECK:   She implied that Senator McGrath was  a racist — Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 123 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   At this point in the night —and I apologise to the public servants who have to endure this, 
but I'm not going to just sit here and take this rubbish. We can keep it going t ill 11 o'clock, which I'm very happy 
to do, or we can move to some other questions that don't relate to the size of the Public Service or the wages of 
the public servants who you are going to sack.  
Senator McGRATH:   If the pay rise is built  in as you 're saying, then isn't the headcount going to decline?  
Senator Gallagher:   As I said a few minutes ago, there are on s and offs across the Public Service. There are 
funding areas , like in Services Australia, where we had funded additional staff for a period of time  and where 
further work is being undertaken to work out what the ongoing resourcing requirements are. That is reflected in 
the budget papers.  
Senator McGRATH:   So you 'll be sacking public servants , then?  
Senator Gallagher:   No, that is not correct.  
Senator McGRATH:   But t hat's the only way your figures are going to add up, is n't it? 
Senator Gallagher:   I can 't help it if you can't read budget papers. It's all been clear in the budget papers for 
some time.  
Senator McGRATH:   Secretary, I 've got some questions in relation to the Legal Services Directions , probably 
in the context of ComSuper and so forth.  
Ms Wilkinson :  Do you mean Comcover?  
Senator McGRATH:   Yes, Comcover. The L egal Services Directions e xpressly  deal with confidentiality 
clauses. They say : 
The entity is only to agree that the terms of settlement are confidential and cannot be disclosed where this is necessary to 
protect the Commonwealth's interests.  
Are you able to explain what the 'Commonwealth's interests ' mean in this context? Is it a  sum of money?  
Ms Wilkinson :  I might ask Ms Antone , who's responsible for Comcover,  to explain how we think about this.  
Ms Antone :  The Legal Services Directions are very much the domain of the Attorney -General's Department. 
They do put out guidance on each of the requirements that apply to non -corporate Commonwealth entities 
through the Legal Services Directions. But I can say that, yes, they do apply to us , and so we do take this 
provision into account in the way in which we administ er Com cover. The 'Commonwealth 's interests ' is quite a 
broad term which can take into account a variety of things. Normally , it's not purely that the number itself 
shouldn't be out there, although that could be one factor insofar as there may  be precedential value that need s to 
be taken into account  so that a particular number doesn't then inadvertently prejudice future considerations or 
resolutions of other matters that may  be afoot  or are expected in the future.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think you 've touched upon this , but I'll just clarif y. How does it protect the 
Commonwealth's interest to keep the settlement sum secret?  
Ms Antone :  I'll stress that  that is not the sole purpose, nor is it the sole consideration. It could be one factor 
among many. Indeed, the government has made it quite clear, since the Set the standard  report, that 
confidentiality would only really be used in a manner that does not prevent individuals from sharing their story 
and, certainly , from everyone learning from people's experiences. On your point about the dollar figure, to the 
extent that it might be taken into account in the context of these considerations, that's  one small factor. As I say, 
what can occur is that , when a number goes out, it can prejudice considerations in other contexts  because people 
often consider a figure a nd try to draw connections with other factual circumstances , but, in fact, every matter 
turns on its individual circumstances.  
Senator McGRATH:   I think you 've answered this , but the Legal Services Direction s say this: 
Before imposing or agreeing to such a condition — 
of confidentiality — 
the entity is to satisfy itself, including by raising the matter with a party requesting the condition, that the condition is  
necessary.  
How would the department determine  if that w ere necessary?  
Ms Antone :  The process by which we consider whether confidentiality applies very much depends on the 
circumstances of the legal proceedings or claim that we are managing. So the range of factors that would be taken 
into account to consider what 's necessary will vary quite wildly from one claim to the next. As I say, it's never 
solely a matter  of not wanting  the dollar figure to  be made public.  
Senator McGRATH:   The Legal Services Directions also expressly state : Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 124 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  The entity should also seek to incorporate an exception to enable voluntary disclosure of the settlement (in whole or in part ) to 
the Parliament or to a Parliamentary Committee.  
How do you do that and why?  
Ms Antone :  As you point out , the Legal Services Directions  are, in that paragraph 4.5,  accounting for the fact 
that there is proper process before parliament or parliamentary committees. Of course, it goes without saying that 
there is a process of immunity that can be claimed at this table and there is a process for the committee 
considering that. The Legal Services Directions are serving those protocols and processes as well.  
Senator McGRATH:   This is obviously a parliamentary committee. If the department had entered into an 
agreement pursuant to the terms of the Legal Services Directions, you wouldn't be able to tell us, would you?  
Ms Antone :  There would be necessary consideration of the questio n. We would certainly need to understand 
the implications of responding to sa id question  and, no doubt, turn our minds to whether or not public interest 
immunity would be something that the minister would consider.  
Senator McGRATH:   It is taxpayers ' money , though , isn't it?  
Ms Antone :  Yes, it is. 
Senator McGRATH:   The remaining parts of that clause  4.5 of the Legal Services Direction s say this: 
Where practicable, the responsible Minister is to be consulted before the entity agrees to a settlement inhibiting voluntary 
disclosure to the Parliament or to a Parliamentary Committee.  
Is that something that the department has done in agreement s? 
Senator Gallagher:   This is a matter for AGD , really. T hey have responsibility for the Legal Services 
Directions.  
Senator McGRATH:   I suppose, Minister — 
Senator Gallagher:   Are you deliberately talking slowly as well ? 
Senator McGRATH:   No, I'm trying to make sure , Minister — 
Senator Gallagher:   I think you are.  I've heard you speak a lot faster ! 
Senator McGRATH:   I'm trying to make sure I get the word ing correct , and I think you know I do that when 
I'm trying to be thoughtful.  
Senator SHELDON:   Might as well drag things out.  
Senator Gallagher:   No, he's definitely not trying to drag things out! Didn't you get invited to the fundraiser, 
Senator McGrath —the post -budget -reply drinks?  
Senator SHELDON:   I'll buy you a ticket!  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, I'll buy you five tickets so you can take your friends as well! I've heard there's been 
a bit of action down there with some protesters, that's all.  
Senator McGRATH:   Probably rent a crowd.  
Senator Gallagher:   You could've been there on the doors!  
Senator McGRATH:   I just want to try and understand. Thank you for assisting with the answer there. In 
relation to settlements, I want to go back to that. In relation to the Department of Finance, my question was about 
this: 
Where practicable, the responsible Minister is to be consulted before the entity agrees to a settlement inhibiting voluntary 
disclosure to the Parliament or to a Parliamentary Committee.  
For the Department of Finance, the minister for finance at the table would be the responsible minister. Would that 
be correct?  
Ms Antone :  My reading of that is that it's the minister responsible for the Legal Services Directions 
themselves, being the Attorney -General. I may need to confirm that for you.  
Senator McGRATH:   Just so I understand, for clause 4.5, your advice is —and I'm not disagreeing:  
Where practicable, the responsible Minister is to be consulted before the entity agrees to a settlement inhibiting voluntary 
disclosure to the Parliament or to a Parliamentary Committee.  
That would not be the relevant departmental minister?  
Ms Antone :  I defer to the Attorney -General's Department to ensure that you are receiving the appropriate 
answer on how the Legal Services Directions operate. As I said, my understanding, and how we have complied, is 
that the responsible minister is the Attorney -General. There are certain aspects of the directions in which the Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 125 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  responsible minister, the Attorney -General, delegates to others or provides authority for other ministers to operate 
on his behalf. But I think, in this instance, it's the Attorney -General. I'll correct that on the record if I'm wrong.  
Senator McGRATH:   In general terms, is there an amount the department expects to pay for legal 
representation in a matter where there is a confidentiality clause?  
Ms Antone :  Not at all. The amounts that are paid at the end of the day are very much, 'How long is a piece of 
string?' It varies wildly depending on the circumstances, the complexity of the claim, the number of parties 
involved and the court and how it would like to proceed with the matter if it is involved. There are a whole range 
of factors.  
Senator McGRATH:   I want to ask about the claim brought by Ms Jo Tarnawsky, the former chief of staff to 
the Deputy Prime Minister, who made various allegations in relation to workplace health and safety breaches in 
the office of the Deputy Prime Minister. How much did the Commonwealth pay to settle that matter?  
Ms Wilkinson :  It's longstanding practice that we don't discuss individual comp cover claims in this committee 
and other committees.  
Senator McGRATH:   How much did the Commonwealth pay for its legal representation in that matter, which 
is separate to the settlement figure?  
Ms Wilkinson :  I'm happy to take that on notice and consider whether we could provide that information.  
Senator McGRATH:   I understand that Deputy Prime Minister Richard Marles was named as a respondent in 
that matter. Did the Commonwealth pay for his legal representation too?  
Ms Antone :  We may also need to take that on notice, only insofar as I need to be clear on precisely what 
privacy or other implications there are for any answer. So, if we may, we will need to get back to you on that.  
Senator McGRATH:   If the Commonwealth did pay for his legal representation , how much  was paid? The  
Prime Minister's chief of staff was also named as a respondent in this matter. Did the Commonwealth pay for his 
legal representation too? 
Ms Antone :  Again , we'll need to take that away to consider any privacy or other considerations that may  be at 
play. 
Senator McGRATH:   Could you also take on notice how much the legal bills for Mr Gartrell  were, please . 
Mr Windeyer :  Yes, I'm happy to do that.  
Senator Gallagher:   You know, s ome other committees have given up, Senator McGrath. You don't have to 
be the last person standing . Maybe you could nip down to the fundraiser and have a quick drink and a cheers with 
every body . 
Senator McGRATH:   Thank you, Minister. Did the Commonwealth pay for M s Tarnawsky 's legal 
representation?  
Ms Antone :  The way Comcover operates and claims of this nature operate is that all staff of the 
Commonwealth are provided with support s in a usual fashion in a workplace , but, once a matter becomes 
adversarial , for lack of a better term, it becomes very much that . And the Commonwealth is the employer in that 
dynamic, and the individual is bringing a claim against the employer. So , in the usual sense , you would not 
normally see an employer pay for an employee to bring a claim against them.  
Senator McGRATH:   Which law firms were engaged to represent the Commonwealth, Mr Marles and Mr 
Gartrell ? 
Ms Antone :  I can give you an answer with respect to the Commonwealth , and then , as with the other 
questions that you posed with respect to the other parties , we'll take the other components on notice , to take into 
account privacy and other considerations. For the Commonwealth's purposes , the solicitors on record  were 
Ashurst.  
Senator McGRATH:   How much was paid to them in legal costs?  
Ms Antone :  I'll have to take that on notice.  
Senator McGRATH:   Were any other  law firms engaged to provide legal advice or any other law services in 
relation to this matter?  
Ms Antone :  There were barristers involved.  
Senator McGRATH:   On notice, could you list the barristers  and say how much was paid to them in legal 
costs?  
Ms Antone :  Yes. Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 126 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator McGRATH:   Were any other professional services firms engaged in relation to this matter?  
Ms Antone :  No. 
Senator McGRATH:   Was this matter reported as a significant legal issue?  
Ms Antone :  Yes, it was.  
Senator McGRATH:   On what date?  
Ms Antone :  I don't have that with me, sorry . I'll take it on notice.  
Senator McGRATH:   Thank you. I'm sure the minister will be very pleased to know that I've finished my line 
of questioning.  
Senator Gallagher:   For the entire night , or just as a — 
Senator McGRATH:   Not the entire night.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, then I'm not that thrilled.  
Senator McGRATH:   I was going to be quiet!  
ACTING CHAIR (Senator Colbeck ):  We're done with Finance.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, that's good for Finance!  It's not good for me ! 
ACTING CHAIR:   In the absence of the chair, I'll suspend the hearing.  
Proceedings suspended from 21:59 to 22:16  
ASC Pty Ltd  
CHAIR:   I welcome Mr Stuart Whiley, CEO and managing director of ASC, and other officers. Do you have 
an opening statement this evening?  
Mr Whiley :  Yes, I do.  
CHAIR:   You've been briefed on the application of parliamentary privilege while giving evidence overseas?  
Mr Whiley :  That's correct.  
CHAIR:   Take care should anything arise in your giving of evidence that you might need that protection for.  
Mr Whiley :  ASC Pty Ltd is extremely proud of the role it plays in supporting the world -class Collins -class 
submarine capability. It's a role we take very seriously. The recent public commentary regarding ASC's 
performance on the life -of-type extension, LOTE, program has been inaccurate and misleading. I do not intend to 
comment directly on the sledges made in the media beyond this opening statement. While decisions regarding the 
scope and scheduling of Collins -class submarine sustainment are matters for the Department of Defence, ASC 
works closely with both navy and NSC on the submarine enterprise to organise Collins -class capability and 
availability outcomes within the allocated resources, including the delivery of the LOTE program. ASC can 
assure the committee that submarine safety will not be compromised through the LOTE program. Over and above 
the normal safety processes, as noted, by the nature of the design, an independent governance regime was 
established at the outset of the program to ensure the program's performance and objectives are met and 
maintained. The latest review found that the proposed designs for each of the LOTE tasks are technically sound. 
No technical issues were identified, and the maturity of the detailed design for the project was progressing 
satisfactorily.  
LOTE is a complex developmental program. As with many programs with complexities there are many 
ongoing challenges associated with specific deliverables, and we continue to work closely with our submarine 
enterprise partners to mitigate these challenges. Providing a safe, viable and reliable Collins class submarine to 
the Royal Australian Navy is ASC's highest priority, along with the safety of our workforce and the Navy 
submariners.  
ASC continues to progress the design process as per our contracted commitments, which include contractual 
coverage of the planning and the conduct of the LOTE full -cycle docking from mid -2026 . The current nominal 
planning schedule will be refined to establish the actual LOTE FCD schedule and resource allocation through the 
normal NSC planning process. This process will commence 12 months ahead of full -cycle dock. This process is 
what ASC outlined at our last estimates appearance.  
ASC, more broadly, continues to meet its obligations under the respective tasking statements and progress as 
well as the  nation's sustain and build partners for a conventionally armed nuclear submarine program . ASC, over 
the last 12 months, has deployed 150 personnel overseas with the required skills and capabilities to support these 
programs. ASC is well aware of its commitments and the critical role it undertakes and the importance of the 
work for Australia's national security.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 127 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   I might advise that ANI was released, for those listening and following the program. Senator Hume.  
Senator HUME:   Thank you, Mr Whiley, for your opening statement, and I acknowledge the assertions in that 
statement. I do note that you said that you don't intend to comment directly on the assertions made in the media, 
beyond this statement, but that's not necessarily how Senate estimates work. We will be asking you some 
questions, specifically, about some of those assertions, and I do hope that you will be able to enlighten us a little 
further above and beyond the detailed statement that you have made. At the last Senate estimates, Vice Admiral 
Hammond said to questions from Senator Reynolds:  
At this stage, our intention is still to conduct a life -of-type extension on all six submarines commencing with Farncomb  in 
mid-2026 …  
And he said:  
The plan for Farncomb is unchanged at the moment.  
He then clarified this to:  
The plan for Farncomb is unchanged.  
Since then, has there been any change made to the plan for the Farncomb  life-of-type extension program?  
Mr Whiley :  From our contractual basis, our work remains as per the contracted scope. We, as yet, are in a 
nominal scope for Farncomb . As I said in my opening statement, the DFAT planning window is yet to open up 
for Farncombe . 
Senator HUME:   Is that no, that no change has been made to the plan?  
Mr Whiley :  The basis of our work continues as per our contract. The detailed planning for Farncomb , 
specifically, as I said in my opening statement, won't occur until 12 months out from the — 
Senator HUME:   Right.  As per the contract, I suppose, does the contract allow for changes to the plan, and, if 
it does, has the contract been changed or has the plan been changed?  
Mr Whiley :  I'm going to defer to my colleague Paul Gay on this particular question.  
Mr Gay :  Since Chief of Navy made those comments, there's been no change in our plans.  
Senator HUME:   Had the plan been changed before the Chief of Navy made those comments?  
Mr Gay :  The design phase that we're in, at the moment, is proceeding as it has. There's no particular change 
there. We are still in a detailed design phase and we're still progressing.  
Senator HUME:   Have any changes been considered to the scope of the life -of-type extension?  
Mr Gay :  In terms of consideration, if it's not in our contract, that would be a matter for Defence to comment 
on.  
Senator HUME:   Is there a version of the life -of-type extension that's being considered that would, in any 
way, reduce the works that are being undertaken?  
Mr Gay :  That's a difficult question to answer, because we work very closely with Defence and, as you'd 
imagine, we are always in conversations around particular aspects of scope et cetera. But, broadly, as Mr Whiley 
said in his opening statement, there is no particular change but there are always conversations around minor 
adjustments.  
Senator HUME:   Is there timing around which a decision will be made for the final scope of the l ife-of-type 
extension pro gram for Farncomb ? 
Mr Gay :  Yes. As Mr Whiley said, we start that detailed planning phase about one year out from 
commencement with a process in our contract of what we call the advanced planning letter. And we expect that 
about 12 months out from commencement. That is when Defence will definitively tell us what the scope for the 
first LOTE FCD is.  
Senator HUME:   And 12 months out from commencement is —sorry, can you remind me? It's in this opening 
statement. Mid -2026?  
Mr Gay :  It's approximately mid this year.  
Senator HUME:   Mid this year is the beginning of the 12 months, or it's the — 
Mr Gay :  It's the beginning of the detailed planning phase.  
Senator HUME:   Is it possible that the final l ife-of-type extension program will not prepare Farncomb  for 
another 10 years of service?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 128 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Gay :  Again, it's not really for us to comment on how Navy manages its capability. Our role at the moment  
is the detailed design phase, and, as we've just said, we will see the detailed implementation scope approximately 
12 months out from there. At this stage, we're proceeding on the design on the basis of the current usage and 
upkeep cycle. But any changes to that or decisions around that would be a matter for Defence.  
Senator HUME:   Are the decisions that are made around life -of-type extensions the same for each vessel?  
Mr Gay :  No, the particular scope  is really assessed on a vessel -by-vessel basis.  
Senator HUME:   So it's possible, then, that the overall l ife-of-type extension program —I'm sorry if you feel 
like I'm shouting into the microphone; I think it's because I couldn't hear Mr Whiley so well, so now I'm 
bellowing for the sake of it.  
Mr Gay :  No, that's fine. Your comms are very clear.  
Senator HUME:   Oh, good. Is it possible, then, that the overall l ife-of-type extension program may upgrade 
some of the Collins class submarines for an additional 10 -year service but not others?  
Mr Gay :  Again, from our perspective, it's a hypothetical because we are working on the design, and Defence 
will tell us what the implementation scope is at the advanced planning letter 12 months out. So, from our 
perspective, that is speculation, but that would be a question for Defence.  
Senator HUME:   Do you advise Defence on what is and is not possible as part of that scope?  
Mr Gay :  We do. We work very closely with Defence, as you'd imagine, we are co-located, as per the course 
of our contract, and we have all those types of conversations. But, ultimately, the decision for what goes in there 
is for Defence.  
Senator HUME:   Are there some vessels upon which you are advising that are more difficult to extend for 10 
years than others?  
Mr Gay :  I wouldn't go as far as to say 'more difficult' to upgrade for the 10 -year position, but each vessel has 
a slightly different configuration. Certain submarines have done more sea time et cetera, so there are different 
variables on the platforms, and when we get that advanced planning letter from Defence, we look at those aspects 
and then give them advice of what their schedule may look like.  
Senator HUME:   Alright. Well, then, to your knowledge, have there been any delays in the planning or the 
design work for the l ife-of-type extension program more broadly?  
Mr Gay :  I would say that we have a detailed design phase which supports the implementation.  
Senator HUME:   That didn't sound very definitive.  
Mr Gay :  I would say your comment there was more broadly; we would say that we have a design phase 
which supports the implementation.  
Senator HUME:   So, the design phase, you're saying, needs to be somewhat elastic in order to deliver on 
Defence's specs and expectations?  
Mr Gay :  No. As Mr Whiley said in his opening comments, it is a complex and developmental program. So I 
do apologise if I'm not being super -definitive. There are small parts of the scope that move around, and ultimately 
the decision for that is for Navy or Defence to consider that scope.  
Senator HUME:   Did the remediation plan for the sustainment that came out of the February projects -of-
concern summit foreshadow any changes to life -of-type extension?  
Mr Gay :  The projects of concern —the remediation plan —is actually classified.  
Senator HUME:   Right. Isn't that, though, essentially just an iteration or articulation of what you're doing on 
the planning and design work for the life -of-type extension program that you're describing to us?  
Mr Gay :  The remediation plan is classified, so I really couldn't comment on what is in or isn't in that.  
Senator HUME:   Alright. What pressures, then, exist that would delay the planning of the life -of-type 
extension program?  
Mr Gay :  Again, it's sort of a future -works question. As Mr Whiley said in his opening statement, this is a 
complex and developmental program. We do assess the scope on a platform -by-platform basis, and there are all 
sorts of challenges that we have discussed here before in this forum, as Mr Whiley pointed out in his opening 
statement. There are all sorts of issues that we are dealing with now. Some of them are product -of-concern 
related, around productivity, supply chain et cetera. There are a lot of pressures in there. There's no one, definitive 
particular issue.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 129 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   The Defence portfolio budget statement says, of the life -of-type extension, 'during 2025 -26 
the project will continue to progress core design elements through to production readiness'. Does that indicate that 
progress in the life -of-type design planning is behind schedule?  
Mr Gay :  No. Again, that's a Defence budget, so it would really be for them to talk to the details. But the way I 
would interpret it is that the design phase is funded, and it is moving into, once we get through the detailed design 
phase, 'production readiness', which were the words there. That means testing the feasibility of the 
implementation, is what I'd say for that.  
Senator HUME:   Okay. Can I ask whether Defence has recently requested changes to the life -of-type 
extension program that were not previously within its scope?  
Mr Gay :  Not to any significant extent that I'm aware of. I can see the puzzled look on your face! There are 
incremental changes to our contract as the maturity of the design moves forward. But the core design, as we've 
talked about, is in its design phase. There are minor adjustments to our contract as additional procurement or 
things like that arise.  
Senator HUME:   Are they material? Or minor?  
Mr Gay :  I might have to take that on notice as to its materiality. But I don't see that as a scheduled risk. It's 
more of a progression of the design.  
Senator HUME:   Have changes been signalled for Farncomb 's life -of-type extension program following its 
listing as a project of concern?  
Mr Gay :  Again, the product of concern is classified, and any questions relating to that would be a matter for 
Defence.  
Senator HUME:   Alright. This is very frustrating. You know that, don't you? You can probably tell.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, you're asking a lot of questions that are really Defence related, so — 
Senator HUME:   Well, they are entirely relevant to the work ASC does.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, yes: ASC does the work that Defence asks it to do.  
Senator HUME:   Hopefully. Is there any risk that a reduced scope in the Farncomb  life-of-type extension 
program would impact the program for subsequent submarines?  
Mr Gay :  Again, I would just say that we look at the scope for each platform on a platform -by-platform basis. 
So I don't see a rolling or cascading effect through there.  
Senator HUME:   I have some more questions about other issues. Clearly, I'm hitting my head against a brick 
wall here. Can I ask about progress on appointing a new CEO, after Mr Whiley's announcement of his retirement? 
How is the search going for the successor to Mr Whiley?  
Mr Whiley :  It's not appropriate for me to comment on that matter. I'm not involved in the process.  
Senator Gallagher:   It's underway.  
Mr Whiley :  I'll take the question on notice.  
Senator Gallagher:   It's okay.  
Senator HUME:   I don't think you're allowed to do the recruiting, Mr Whiley!  
Senator Gallagher:   It's underway. The process is underway.  
Senator HUME:   When we say 'underway' — 
Senator Gallagher:   It's not complete; it's underway.  
Senator HUME:   Yes, but I'm wondering to what extent it is underway. Has it gone out to tender? Is there 
recruitment firm?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. 
Senator HUME:   Has there been an ad placed somewhere? Has anybody been tapped on the shoulder and 
asked to apply? Have interviews been held? How far through are we?  
Mr Windeyer :  The process is technically been being led by the ASC board itself, because the CEO 
appointment is officially an appointment made by the board. But we are involved or across the process, and, to 
your question, it is underway. The board is working with a recruitment firm. We are not so far down the track that 
we've got to interviews or anything like that yet.  
Senator HUME:   Have we got a shortlist of candidates?  
Mr Windeyer :  I'm not sure that we do have a shortlist yet —not that I am aware of.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 130 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Is there a timeline that we're working on, to make decisions about Mr Whiley's successor?  
Mr Windeyer :  As expeditiously as possible is the answer, I think.  
Senator HUME:   What does 'expeditiously' mean?  
Mr Windeyer :  It means we want to do it thoroughly and properly. We want to find a good candidate, and we 
don't want to waste any unnecessary time on it, but we don't have a specific deadline that we're working to.  
Senator Gallagher:   It's a very specialised role — 
Senator HUME:   Agreed!  
Senator Gallagher:   and will require an international search.  
Senator HUME:   So it could be two months, six months or 12 months. Do you have a sort of sense that we 
have got to get this done by — 
Mr Windeyer :  I would hope that, of those three scenarios you painted, it wasn't the 12 months. But, from our 
perspective, we're not working to a specific deadline. What's most important is that the board finds the right 
person.  
Senator HUME:   Is there a plan for a transition period between Mr Whiley and his successor?  
Mr Windeyer :  That's not a thing we've had cause to discuss with the board at this point.  
Senator HUME:   Is there anybody online who can enlighten me as to whether that would be considered? Mr 
Whiley might be a good place to start.  
Mr Windeyer :  It's sort of an awkward set of questions for Mr Whiley to offer an opinion on, I think. If we 
need to consider a transition period, we will certainly do that. That will be more us working with the board.  
Senator COLBECK:   Is it a substantial appointment that requires cabinet?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes, it would.  
Senator COLBECK:   So is there a cabinet process subsequent to the board's recommendation?  
Mr Windeyer :  Yes. 
Senator COLBECK:   Are you seeking an individual recommendation or — 
Mr Windeyer :  I can't comment on exactly how this will play out, but the way these things usually play out is 
that a proposal is put to cabinet. What happens after that obviously depends on cabinet, but usually for the 
purposes of these sorts of things a proposition is put to cabinet rather than cabinet getting a shortlist or a list to 
choose from, for example.  
Senator HUME:   I have some more questions.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, keep going. We're the last committee in the building, so keep going.  
CHAIR:   Senator Hume, you are the only person seeking the call.  
Senator HUME:   How many employees now work for ASC at Osborne?  
Senator Gallagher:   It probably wouldn't have changed since the last estimates. I think this question was 
answered. I'm sure we went through this, Mr Whiley , at the last estimates you appeared at, which was less than a 
month ago.  
Mr Whiley :  1,689 permanent workforce in South Australia.  
Senator HUME:   Can you break down a daily cost of operations at ASC at Osborne?  
Mr Whiley :  We can do, but I don't think we do do that.  
Mr Menadue :  We don't monitor and break down by day.  
Senator HUME:   Obviously the reason I ask is that on 7 August last year the AMWU pronounced that 
workers would walk offsite at Osborne for 100 hours as part of their pay negotiations. I'm wondering whether you 
have a record of how many workers participated in that particular industrial action.  
Senator Gallagher:   I think we covered all of this at last estimates with Senator Reynolds. Honestly, can we 
go back to the Hansard  of the evidence that was given then? We've got officials in the UK taking time out from 
the work they're doing to do this, and you're asking them the same questions you asked a month ago.  
Senator HUME:   Senator Gallagher, I know you've had a long week and you are very tired, but it is — 
Senator Gallagher:   Don't patronise me, Senator Hume. You are asking the same questions your party asked 
three weeks ago.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 131 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   I am asking them now. I'd like to know whether there is any update. I know it is late here but 
it is actually 11.30 over there.  
Senator Gallagher:   Make them worthwhile at least. We know you've been to a fundraiser and had a bit of 
fun, and you've come back and now you'd like to perform, but the reality is that the questions you have asked — 
Senator HUME:   Nobody is watching. I'm just asking the ASC.  
Senator Gallagher:   were asked three weeks ago about the amount of hours lost, about how they're keeping up 
with it post the industrial action and about what the cost of industrial action was. It was all asked last time.  
Senator HUME:   I'm wondering if the ASC has any updates.  
Senator Gallagher:   It was only three weeks ago, and we haven't had any industrial action since then, so I 
would find it very unusual if there were any updates to the answers.  
Senator HUME:   Those answers that were given —if they were asked and answered then perhaps there 
wouldn't be so many pauses when I ask, 'Have you got things like a cost per day of operations at ASC?'  
Senator SHELDON:   They probably wouldn't expect the same stupid questions.  
Senator HUME:   I'm sorry?  
Senator Gallagher:   Are these included in the 40,000 you're going to sack as well, or do you want to build 
some submarines?  
Senator HUME:   Goodness me, you are tetchy tonight! Maybe you need more sleep.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm not tetchy. I'm just holding you to account for the decisions you've taken.  
Senator HUME:   If you could just answer the questions I've asked it would be fine.  
Senator Gallagher:   You want to find $7 billion in savings by sacking public servants. I am asking if you are 
including ASC in that.  
Senator HUME:   I can't believe you are filibustering at 20 to 11 at night.  
Senator Gallagher:   Are you including ASC in the 40,000 public servants you're going to sack? Or do you 
want to build and sustain the Collins class?  
Senator HUME:   Perhaps you've already beaten me to it.  
Senator Gallagher:   What does that mean?  
Senator HUME:   Mr Whiley , do you have any record of how many workers participated in that industrial 
action?  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm sure he does back in Adelaide; not in London. Sorry, Mr Whiley . It has been a very 
long week.  
Mr Whiley :  No problems. I don't have that in front of me. Obviously on any one day there were different 
numbers in that action. We have records of people taking action in our system.  
Senator HUME:   Have you estimated the cost to production, including the delays and the follow -on delays, as 
a consequence of that industrial action?  
Mr Whiley :  We know exactly how many hours we lost as a result of the action.  
Senator Gallagher:   I can give you that. It's a bit closer to home:  
Senator REYNOLDS: Can you give us an update on the prolonged workers strike? … from memory, you provided us with an 
estimate of the impact on the schedule … so what is the latest on the impact of that strike on the schedule?  
Mr Whiley: I don't think we provided an impact on the schedule. What we provided was an impact of direct labour hours lost 
associated with industrial action, and the final figure was about 29,000 man -hours lost over 52 industrial actions across the 
two states.  
Senator REYNOLDS: That's a lot. What was the impact? That's the lost hours and the number of actions, so what was the 
material impact on the schedule for — 
Mr Whiley: That's currently being worked through.  
And here I enter the conversation:  
Senator Gallagher: Part of the remediation plan is working through some of those issues.  
Senator Reynolds: So we've got a situation, Mr Whiley, where you're responsible for a schedule to deliver these vital nationa l 
assets. We heard in September that … these 52 industrial actions had had a significant impact on the availability of the Coll ins 
… 
It goes on:  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 132 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  So you're telling me now that … the impact on the schedule was from these 29,000 hours ? 
Mr Whiley: Well, the industrial action didn't finish until November … we basically got an agreement at the end of November, 
and it was only ratified in Fair Work last week, in terms of the South Australian agreement …  
Senator Reynolds: Just to make sure: 29,000 hours lost —correct?  
Mr Whiley: Yes, direct hours lost via people taking industrial action, approximately.  
It goes on and on.  
Senator HUME:   Sorry, I j ust want to make sure Hansard 's getting a record of the Hansard  record.  Minister, 
can I ask you a question . Are the  additional costs accounted for in this budget?  
Senator Gallagher:   We have not provided any additional funding  to ASC , if that's what you're asking.  
Senator HUME:   No. W hat I wanted to ask Mr Whiley was: are  the costs from that industrial action reported 
to the Commonwealth?  
Senator Gallagher:   Yes. Well, no— 
Senator HUME:   Are those costs then accounted for in your budget?  
Senator Gallagher:   ASC has provided updates to me on the industrial action and other matters relating to 
ASC , and, as Mr W hiley gave in evidence just three weeks ago, the remediation plan through that and working 
through that is part of their ongoing work. But have we been asked for or provided any more to ASC ? The answer 
to that is no.  
Mr Windeyer :  The costs associated with the work ASC does are costs that are a matter for Defence. It's a 
matter between the customer and ASC.  
Senator HUME:   So the 18 ½ per cent pay rise that employees were given in November last year was a very 
high pay rise.  
Senator Gallagher:   Not as high as  what  the industrial dispute was over, Senator Hume.  
Senator HUME:   In the 12 months of negotiations, did the ASC witness a significant number of staff moving 
to Perth to take up similar work for more pay? Was that a phenomenon that you saw in Osborne ? 
Mr Whiley :  No, Senator.  
Senator Gallagher:   No, b ut the industrial dispute was linked over connections to Perth.  
Senator HUME:   At the time of the bargaining, what percentage of ASC's workforce supported the AMWU?  
Senator Gallagher:   I think it was p retty well supported.  
Senator HUME:   I'm asking for t he percentage . 
Senator Gallagher:   I don't know if there's a percentage , but it's a  pretty  highly unionised worksite.  
Senator HUME:   Is it m ore than 50 per cent  or less than 50 per cent?  
Mr Whiley :  Is that question for me?  
Senator HUME:   Yes. They were all for you, Mr Whiley. You just  got interrupted.  
Mr Whiley :  We don't know who is actually in the union themselves . But , as I previously said, the action was 
taken by our trades resource, and they would be, of our total workforce for Osborne, probably around  25 per cent  
in terms of the totality of the number . 
Senator HUME:   Sorry,  I struggled to hear you a bit there. I just want to be clear . Did you say that around 25 
per cent — 
Mr Whiley :  Approximately . This is an approximate.  
Senator Gallagher:   I think it would be higher than that.  
Mr Whiley :  I can take that question on notice  and give you a definitive number for w hat percentage of our 
trade workforce is in Osborne  to the broader ASC company. I'll take that question on notice , if you like, to give 
you a definitive answer to it . 
Senator HUME:   Minister, have you been briefed , then, on the additional cost to ASC's operation  as a result 
of the agreement ? 
Senator Gallagher:   I've been briefed appropriately on all matters relating to the ASC. They send me regular 
updates.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 133 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   As the shareholder minister, obviously, and a member of the ERC, t o what extent was the 
potential impact on critical national security projects accounted for when you considered the same job, same pay 
legislation?  
Senator Gallagher:   Oh, I see where we're going. You think this is a result of same job, same pay?  
Senator HUME:   Well, it is clear in that legislation.  
Senator Gallagher:   I think it was more linked to the fact that the workers in WA had achieved a higher pay 
outcome for a number of different reasons  in a previous round. My understanding was workers at Osborne were 
trying to argue that they should get a similar outcome . That wasn't ultimately where the negotiations landed. From 
my point of view  and from the defence minister's point of view, we were keen to see the industrial dispute 
resolved, as you would expect we would be.  
Senator HUME:   Obviously , under your legislation, unions don't require a majority of support from staff in 
order to negotiate. That's why I asked how many of the staff at Osborne are members of the AMWU . 
Senator Gallagher:   I think Mr W hiley has answered as much as he can. I would have thought it would have 
been higher than that on a worksite like that , but I can't give you that figure tonight. I don't have it.  
Senator HUME:   Perhaps, Minister, you could then answer — 
Senator Gallagher:   And p eople don't actually have to tell you if they're a member of a union. I know under 
your administration you might like to frogmarch them out and  make them show their union cards.  
Senator HUME:   You're so tetchy tonight. I just want to ask some questions.  
Senator Gallagher:   Not at all.  I'm not tetchy at all.  
Senator HUME:   Goodness me. You need some more sleep.  
Senator Gallagher:   I've been enjoying this enormously tonight.  
Senator HUME:   I can tell.  
Senator Gallagher:   You've missed most of it, Senator Hume, because you've been at the fundraiser. I've had a 
great  time tonight. I've l oved every second that I've been sitting here ! 
Senator HUME:   You've only got another 10 minutes to go.  
Senator Gallagher:   Nine minutes, according to my watch.  
Senator HUME:   Unless we decide to stay on.  
Senator Gallagher:   We were keen to get the indust rial dispute resolved. It has been resolved. I know you're 
trying to link it to same job, same pay. I don't think it can be. I think the union advocated in the interests of their 
members , as you would expect . The employer sought to resolve it. There was industrial dispute for a number of 
months. It's been resolved , and a remediation plan is being worked on , as you would expect.  
Senator HUME:   I know  you are  in a domestic portfolio, not an international one, Minister — 
Senator Gallagher:   I am a member of NSC , so I have some line of sight , thank you, for all matters relating to 
our international interests and our national secure.  
Senator HUME:   Have any concerns , then,  been raised by AUKUS partner nations  about the potential — 
Senator Gallagher:   We don't disclose discussions between AUKUS partners  here.  
Senator HUME:   I haven't even finished  the question.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, I just telling you; I don't think it's any surprise to you. Your question was : have any 
concerns been raised by AUKUS partners? I'm saying we don't answer questions like that at estimates.  
Senator HUME:   So you don't feel that there is any reason for AUKUS partners to be concerned about the 
potential for union negotiations to cause  lengthy delays — 
Senator Gallagher:   Why are you talking down the workers at ASC and their capability?  
Senator HUME:   and add significant cost to the AUKUS program? I still haven't finished the question.  
Senator Gallagher:   Why would you be doing that , though ? 
Senator HUME:   I still haven't finished the question.  
Senator Gallagher:   We have enormous faith in ASC to deliver what Defence requires of them. The industrial 
dispute has been resolved. Plans are under way to  make up time on that, and negotiations will continue between 
ASC and Defence.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 134 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   In March last year the government announced ASC would partner with BAE Systems to 
build the SNN -AUKUS at Osborne in South Australia , and it was reported last week that the AMWU is now 
demanding a 30 per cent pay increase at BAE Systems in Adelaide. That same report indicated that about 500 
workers were participating in industrial action , where the workforce is believed to be nearly 2 ½ thousand . Can I 
ask this question to the ASC . Do you think that your negotiations with the AMWU last year have set a precedent 
for the unions to demand highe r—and in some circumstances unfairly high —wage  rises, even when they don't 
have the majority of support among workers?  
Senator Gallagher:   There  are a lot of ifs — 
Senator HUME:   I wasn't asking you, Minister. I've got one for you too.  
Senator Gallagher:   Let me  just say, there  are a lot of ifs in that —'if this happens ' and 'do you think  this 
happens because of that because they didn't have a majority of union membership ?' It's a matter for BAE Systems 
to negotiate with their employees. In the end , ASC was  able to reach agreement with its employees.  
Senator HUME:   Again, to ASC, has this set a precedent , do you think , that has allowed unions to unfairly 
demand high wages even when there is n't a majority of support among the workers?  
Mr Whiley :  I think the negotiation with BAE was a standard negotiation. Our negotiation was, as the minister 
said, based on some historical issues that drove the workforce to make the claim, and we negotiated with them on 
that basis.  
Senator HUME:   So you think 30 per cent is a reasonable demand?  
Senator Gallagher:   I don't think Mr Whiley needs to provide an opinion on that. It's a claim by a union in a 
negotiation, Senator Hume. I know it's a foreign concept to you that people would have a negotiation about 
getting wage outcomes for their workers.  
Senator HUME:   You're so tetchy. Just calm down. We've got five more minutes.  
Senator Gallagher:   I'm not tetchy at all. I'm finding you frustrating because you're just perpetuating your 
anti-union, antiworker ideology here late at night without any obvious reason other than — 
Senator HUME:   Other than the cost to the taxpayer.  
Senator Gallagher:   you want to keep going.  
Senator HUME:   Oh, it'd be awful to concentrate on the cost to the taxpayer! Who would've thought — 
Senator Gallagher:   We've already told — 
Senator HUME:   that somebody in a finance portfolio would be interested in cost to the taxpayer.  
Senator Gallagher:   Okay, you can divert over there, but really your problem is about workers and unions. We 
see that; we know that and we'll no doubt hear more of it from you. But, at five minutes to 11, it's not related to 
budget estimates as far as I can see. I've answered your questions about — 
Senator HUME:   Well, I'm going to ask then — 
Senator Gallagher:   everything in the budget that relates to this.  
Senator HUME:   Minister, if you'd let me just ask a question, have you been briefed on the potential — 
Senator Gallagher:   I've told you.  
Senator HUME:   fiscal impacts of such high increases to the bottom line for our AUKUS projects?  
Senator Gallagher:   The potential of high increases of a union claim is part of a negotiation with BAE 
Systems.  
Senator HUME:   So no?  
Senator Gallagher:   I have been appropriately briefed at all times by ASC, and I will continue to be.  
Senator HUME:   On the fiscal impacts of industrial action?  
Senator Gallagher:   I have been appropriately briefed on all matters relating to ASC by ASC, and I will 
continue to be.  
Senator HUME:   Is there a fiscal impact?  
Senator Gallagher:   And I thank Mr Whiley and his colleagues for their leadership and Mr Whiley, in 
particular, as he's departing the organisation —probably as soon as we can let him go —for all of the leadership he 
has provided that organisation. We've been fortunate to have him.  
Senator HUME:   I agree and also acknowledge the leadership of Mr Whiley. Has there been a briefing about 
the fiscal impact?  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 135 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Gallagher:   I've told you. I've been appropriately briefed at all times.  
Senator HUME:   I'm not asking whether it's been appropriate; I'm assuming it has been. If it was 
inappropriate, it would be strange.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, I've answered the question.  
Senator HUME:   But is it fiscal?  
Senator Gallagher:   I've answered the question. I'm completely comfortable I've answered the question. You 
might not like my answer, but that is the answer. You can — 
Senator HUME:   Is there a fiscal impact?  
Senator Gallagher:   No, that is a different question. The question you've been asking me is whether I've been 
briefed on any fiscal impact, and my answer to that is I have been appropriately briefed at all times. If there is 
anything further relating to this, it will be reflected in the budget papers at the appropriate time. It may be you, 
Senator Hume, if you win the election and — 
Senator HUME:   Maybe.  
Senator Gallagher:   that is the normal way these matters get dealt with — 
Senator HUME:   That's why I'm asking the questions.  
Senator Gallagher:   and there hasn't been. So rest assured I am appropriately briefed.  
Senator HUME:   So is it reflected in the budget papers?  
Senator Gallagher:   I have told you all government decisions to date have been reflected in the budget papers. 
We've said that about 15 times today.  
Senator HUME:   And is the fiscal impact of any industrial action reflected in the budget papers?  
Senator Gallagher:   We've answered that, and I've read out Senator Reynold's Hansard to you about it.  
Senator HUME:   So it is reflected in the budget papers?  
Senator Gallagher:   All government decisions are reflected in the budget. I've said there hasn't been — 
Senator HUME:   This wasn't a government decision; this was inflicted upon you.  
Senator Gallagher:   If you'd listened earlier and perhaps you've had a little bit too much fun at the 
fundraiser — 
Senator HUME:   Not for the campaign.  
Senator Gallagher:   you asked about any supplementation or any increased funding, and I have answered that 
question, so you're asking the same question again. My answer that I gave earlier has not changed.  
Senator HUME:   So there is no fiscal impact from the industrial action at ASC that is reflected in the budget?  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, I've answered that. I answered it earlier.  
Senator HUME:   Just say 'yes' or 'no'.  
Senator Gallagher:   I've answered it earlier. I'm sorry, Senator Hume, if you can't keep up with me. That's not 
my problem. I've answered the question.  
Senator HUME:   Why can't you just say 'yes' or 'no'?  
Senator Gallagher:   I've answered the question. It's going to continue to be my answer. If you didn't hear it or 
can't understand it, go back and read the Hansard . 
Senator HUME:   I didn't ask that question though.  
Senator Gallagher:   You did. You asked a similar question, and I answered it.  
Senator HUME:   So there is fiscal impact from industrial action reflected in the 2025 budget?  
Senator Gallagher:   That is a different question.  
Senator HUME:   Well, can you answer that one?  
Senator Gallagher:   That is a different question, and I will rely on the evidence that I provided to your earlier 
questions.  
Senator HUME:   You are very defensive tonight, Minister, but I understand it's been a long week.  
Senator Gallagher:   I am not very defensive tonight, Senator Hume; I am not. I really enjoyed this evening. I 
really wish we could have spent more time here.  Thursday, 27 March 2025  Senate  Page 136 
 
FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator HUME:   Before we finish, Chair, I just want to say thank you very much for chairing this committee 
for the last three years. I realise that we thought it was your last committee hearing at the last estimates, and we 
didn't acknowledge your service in the chair. And I'm sorry about that. So I'm quite glad that at least we got a 
chance to do that tonight.  
CHAIR:   Thank you.  
Senator HUME:   You have served your committee extremely well.  
Senator Gallagher:   And we're going to miss you, Lou —a lot.  
Senator COLBECK:   Yes. Thanks, Louise.  
CHAIR:   Thank you. I will miss all of you as well — 
Senator Gallagher:   A little bit?  
CHAIR:   but perhaps not these 11 pm conclusions. I want to thank all of my colleagues in the Senate and 
particularly everyone on this committee. I also want to thank the public servants who come to estimates hearings 
so that we can all understand the issues.  
Senator Gallagher:   Well, there'll be a few left to get in.  
CHAIR:   That concludes our hearing, so thank you to all witnesses. Thank you to the ASC. Thank you to 
Hansard and Broadcasting; I thank all of you for your work throughout my career.  
Committee adjourned at 23:01  
 